                             2096 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Op Talk)

                             June 12, 2014 Thursday

Morning Views

BYLINE: JAKE FLANAGIN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 563 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Opinions on Republican nihilism, inmate phone calls, taxpayer-funded
campaigns, sex-trafficking laws and Middle East militants.


"The forces of political nihilism not only remain alive and well within the
Republican Party, but they are on the rise," writes The New York Times editorial
board. The Times finds the defeat of Eric Cantor, the House majority leader, by
David Brat, an upstart "of the distant extremes," to be both regrettable and
disconcerting. For the Republicans of Virginia's Seventh Congressional District,
even Mr. Cantor, "who had been one of the most implacable opponents to the
reform of immigration, health care and taxation," was apparently too moderate.
"His crime (in addition to complacent campaigning)? He was occasionally obliged,
as a leader, to take a few minimalist steps toward governing, like raising the
debt ceiling and ending a ruinous shutdown."

Other significant viewpoints from around the world:

"Jail inmates need rehabilitation, not exploitation," writes The San Francisco
Chronicle. "That's the convincing logic behind a San Francisco plan to lower
exorbitant phone charges for inmates who want to keep in touch with families and
prepare for a more productive life" post-release. The editorial board recognizes
the need for a reasonable amount of oversight on external communications, but
the rates "are set at sky-high levels that limit contact with the outside world"
to the point of being socially damaging. For California's incarcerated
population, "more contact undercuts recidivism," and increased communication
with family can "break a destructive trend where children of inmates often end
up on the wrong side of the law."

Connecticut has "the best campaign finance laws in the country," writes The
Hartford Courant. A federal court ruling handed down Tuesday should put an end
to the Democratic Governors Association's attempts to override them, the
editorial board writes. The current system, in which taxpayers fund campaigns,
"was sold to the Connecticut people as a way to keep politics transparent and
clean." Reform should only be implemented if it no longer serves that purpose,
for which The Courant sees no evidence.

The seizure of the Iraqi city of Mosul by Al Qaeda-linked militants this week is
"an urgent wake-up call" to the Middle East and the world, writes The Beirut
Daily Star. The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria "now enjoys a strong presence in
parts of two countries, taking advantage of a porous border," the editorial
board explains, and "the phenomenon is too widespread to roll back by using what
have become 'standard' policies." Drone strikes are not the answer, The Daily
Star insists - "instead, officials must take a long, hard look at why Al Qaeda
has survived and grown" in the region.

Minnesota leads the way in the national push against sex trafficking, writes The
Minneapolis Star Tribune. "Thanks to the work of Democrat Amy Klobuchar in the
U.S. Senate and Republican Erik Paulsen in the U.S. House, there may soon be
federal legislation in place to provide incentives for states to pass 'Safe
Harbor' laws similar to those in Minnesota."

Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott's world tour "is turning out to be
distinctly underwhelming," writes The Melbourne Age, "especially on the crucial
matter of climate change." The Age is critical of Mr. Abbott's visit to Canada,
in particular, "to spruik his intention to seek a conservative alliance whose
role would include dismantling international moves to introduce carbon pricing."

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


