                             2856 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       August 3, 2014 Sunday 3:22 AM EST

Meeting brings leaders with U.S. military ties to Washington

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

SECTION: A section; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 933 words


When a cargo plane carrying U.S. troops made an emergency landing in July on a
Ugandan highway, it snarled traffic, drew crowds and caused a sheepish-looking
Marine Corps colonel to apologize on local television. But it also highlighted
the U.S. military's quiet expansion in Africa, seven years after it started a
new command run by a four-star general to oversee military operations across the
continent.

U.S. Africa Command, now led by Army Gen. David M. Rodriguez, was established in
2007 and was billed by U.S. defense officials as a good way to coordinate
growing relationships with friendly African militaries. Its scope has widened to
include drone operations from remote bases, task forces that can respond quickly
in times of crisis, and involvement in operations such as the hunt for central
African warlord Joseph Kony and the search for more than 200 girls who were
kidnapped this year in Nigeria by the militant group Boko Haram.

The expansion isn't expected to be a primary focus as nearly 50 African heads of
state convene on Washington this week for the first ever U.S.-Africa Leaders
Summit, held by the Obama administration. The event is expected to focus heavily
on growing the economic potential of the continent, but will put African leaders
in close proximity to the Pentagon and Washington's national security complex.
The summit's schedule includes one session Wednesday afternoon held by the State
Department on developing peace and regional stability.

U.S. defense officials say the Pentagon's expansion in Africa is necessary as
the United States grapples with the spread of extremism and violence in
countries such as South Sudan and Libya, both of which have had U.S. embassies
evacuated this year. But it also runs the risk of inflaming civilian sentiment
against the United States, said Laura Seay, an Africa analyst and political
scientist at Colby College in Maine.

"I think where the U.S. runs into a lot of challenges is that a lot of these
activities seem innocuous to them and to have a small footprint, but are
actually seen by a lot of people there, especially African civilians, as much
bigger than that and much more insidious," she said. "It's seen as plotting
neocolonial activity."

But U.S. officials consider it necessary, said Benjamin Benson, a spokesman in
Germany for AFRICOM, which is based in Stuttgart. The organization is adapting
its strategy not only to partner with African militaries, but to grapple with
instability and transnational security threats, including al-Qaeda, he said.

"The African continent presents significant opportunities and challenges,
including those associated with military-to-military relationships," Benson
said.

It's difficult to track just how much U.S. military operations in Africa have
grown. AFRICOM has about 2,000 personnel assigned to it full time, 1,500 of whom
work at the Stuttgart headquarters, Benson said. That's up from an initial plan
released in 2008 that called for about 1,300 personnel, half of whom were to be
civilian employees.

That does not take into account all the U.S. troops who deploy to Africa
temporarily, however. They visit countries from Senegal to Malawi, teaching
everything from rifle marksmanship to vehicle maintenance before quietly
redeploying weeks later. There also are an undefined number of U.S. Special
Operations troops, who perform missions such as the hunt for Kony alongside
local forces but also train African commandos in Chad, Niger, Nigeria and other
countries.

The number of U.S. personnel on the ground fluctuates, but it is often about
5,000 across the continent, Benson said.

The largest presence is at Camp Lemonnier, a base tucked into Africa's
northeastern corner in Djibouti. The Pentagon's first major unit in Afghanistan,
Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa, established a camp there in 2003 with
a few hundred Marines sleeping in tents. It has expanded greatly since, and in
2012 the Defense Department presented Congress with a plan for $1.4 billion in
enhancements to the base. Military officials now openly discuss whether families
could eventually join troops on longer assignments there.

From Lemonnier, the United States responded to the crisis in South Sudan and
removed hundreds of U.S. personnel from the capital city of Juba beginning in
December. Among other units, the Pentagon used a group known as the East Africa
Response Force, which was established last year to respond quickly to
emergencies. It primarily comprises U.S. soldiers, although other American
troops also were involved in the operation, defense officials said.

The Marine Corps established a task force with a similar role for northern
Africa last year and called on it to provide airborne security recently when the
United States evacuated its embassy in Libya. It is based in Mor√≥n, Spain, but
frequently operates out of a closer Navy base in Sigonella, Italy, when a crisis
in the region emerges.

In expanding its reach, the U.S. military can help provide short-term stability
in areas experiencing crisis, creating space for political dialogue that can
lead to peace, said John Mukum Mbaku, a Cameroonian-born economist and Africa
analyst at Weber State University in Utah. That can go only so far, though, he
added.

"You have to ask yourself this question: How can you get people to live together
peacefully?" he said. "The main problem in most of these countries is that . . .
you have people who were brought together involuntarily by colonialism. You
cannot force people to live together peacefully if they don't want to work
together peacefully."

dan.lamothe@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


