                             1035 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 3, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Writing Bytes

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; ROUNDUP; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 4262 words


The Internet has changed (and keeps changing) how we live today -- how we find
love, make money, communicate with and mislead one another. Writers in a variety
of genres tell us what these new technologies mean for storytelling.

MARGARET ATWOOD: Do new technologies change what plot devices are available for
writers of fiction? Do chickens have beaks? (Once, the answer to the chicken
question would have been self-evident, but novel food-producing practices must
now give us pause. To search online: De-beaking. Lab meat.)

But back to the query. The answer is, of course. So it has always been. How to
move a character from here to there? (Horse. Boat. Coach. Dogcart, as in
Sherlock Holmes. Train. Streetcar. Automobile. Plane.) How to eliminate a
character in a violent or murderous fashion? (Rock. Club. Knife. Sword. Own
petard. Gun. Fooling with their GPS so they drive into the sea.) How to have
them communicate? (Smoke signals. Drums. Cuneiform. Scroll. Postal Service.
Telegram. Phone. Hole in a tree, if a John le Carr√© spy. E-mail. Writing on your
hand so the mini-drones can't see or hear it.)

Each of these technologies has its downsides and loopholes, which can be turned
against one character by another. Each has its moment of obsolescence, which in
fiction marks the plausibility threshold. Could a landline telephone still ring
as suspensefully as it did in ''Dial M for Murder''? Not likely. A cellphone
playing an annoying bar from the ''William Tell'' Overture, plaintively, under a
shrub, is more like it.

Your practice test: Rewrite Edgar Allan Poe's story ''The Purloined Letter,''
using present-day communications technology. In the original, a ''letter,'' made
of ''paper,'' written in ''ink,'' and bearing a ''seal,'' was disguised as an
inferior letter and hidden in plain view. The letter needed to be invisible to
searchers, but close at hand so it could be quickly produced when needed.

Go to it. I'm sure there are a hundred brilliant solutions to the puzzle of
''The Purloined E-Mail.''

Margaret Atwood's latest novel is ''MaddAddam.''

CHARLES YU: I entered college in 1993 and graduated in 1997. Halfway through,
the Internet became a thing. Netscape said: ''Here you go, here's a door to a
brand-new place in the existence of the universe. We just started letting people
in. Go ahead, it's fun. It'll keep getting bigger for the rest of your life.
Also, you can change stuff in it. You get to make up new rules for everything --
thinking, remembering, communicating.''

This new place needs to be studied; it needs geographers, anthropologists and
economists. There's a new visual and conceptual grammar -- just as we learned
how to look at paintings, so too have we developed ways of looking and being in
cyberspace.

We're trying to understand a metaphor that exploded into the world, one that we
inhabit. That's what we're grappling with. We're trying to draw maps of
uncharted invisible territories. Put that way -- as a cartography of
psychological terrain -- it sounds like a familiar exercise, like a decent
definition of what it means to be a fiction writer. Reality, it turns out, is
its own genre-bending story. And writing fiction has become complicated, since
reality has already written the best possible science fiction story imaginable.

On the other hand, I woke up one day in 1995, and there was this whole new
place. And I get to watch this implausible story unfold. So there's that.

Charles Yu's latest book is ''Sorry Please Thank You.''

MARISHA PESSL: The trouble with technology is that it eradicates a character's
ability to be lost, and it's the state of being in the dark and the journey
toward understanding that has given rise to the greatest stories ever written.
Marlow's voyage up the uncharted Congo in ''Heart of Darkness,'' the shocking
truth of Rochester's past in ''Jane Eyre,'' the mysterious gentleman caller in
''The Glass Menagerie'' -- none of these tales could take place today because
access to a smartphone would reveal mysterious whereabouts, mad first wives and
marital status in seconds without the hero ever needing to leave his living room
couch. And without a character forced to seek answers in the real world there
can be no journey, no transformation.

The writer's mandate is to dig deeper inside our wired world to find the
mystery, the darkness and dislocation. The good news is that the core realities
of our world have not changed: People are still impossible and strange. They
hide things from others and from themselves. There are and always will be
secrets; modern technology is nothing but a layer of noise that buries them even
deeper and which the novelist must clear away to get to the dirt -- the stuff
great stories are made of.

Marisha Pessl is the author of ''Night Film'' and ''Special Topics in Calamity
Physics.''

TOM McCARTHY: Literature more or less begins with an account of a signal
crossing space -- to be precise, with an account of the network along which this
signal travels. In Act 1 of Aeschylus' ''Agamemnon'' (458 B.C.), Clytemnestra
appears outside her palace, supposedly to announce the news that Troy has
fallen. Yet what she in fact describes, in great detail, is the chain of
beacon-towers that has conveyed the news to Argos, naming each staging post.
I've looked into this: these towers weren't low-tech bonfires; they were complex
machines with moving parts and attendant encryption systems. Clytemnestra is
describing the nodes and relays of a telecommunication grid.

The argument that the advent of the Internet somehow marks a Telecom Year Zero
after which nothing will ever be the same can be made only by ignoring the
actual history of literature. Look at Kafka's obsession with telephones; or the
way the phonograph, for Bram Stoker, mirrors the vampire as a machine for
bringing the dead to life (or, conversely, storing the living in dead form); or
at the obsessive attention Samuel Richardson's Clarissa is forced to pay to ink
and desks and messengers. Don't both ''Romeo and Juliet'' and ''Hamlet,'' with
their vital plot-devices of switched or undelivered letters, address anxieties
about the postal system? The best writers have always understood that to write
is to both grapple with and, to some extent, allegorize the very regime of
technological mediation without which writing wouldn't exist in the first place.

Tom McCarthy is the author, most recently, of the novel ''C.''

RAINBOW ROWELL: There's nothing worse for plots than cellphones.

Once your characters have one, there's no reason for them to get lost or
stranded. Or miss each other at the top of the Empire State Building. If you
want anything like that to happen, you either have to explain upfront what
happened to the phones or you have to make at least one character some sort of
manic pixie Luddite who doesn't carry one.

When I started my novel ''Fangirl'' I was determined that the characters would
use technology authentically. They'd text and check e-mail and Google things. I
wanted to prove to myself that I could write a romantic and human story about
people who constantly have laptops in their laps and cellphones in their hands.
Plus, I'm always defending the present to teenagers who read ''Eleanor & Park,''
my novel set in the '80s, and think things were so much more romantic back then.
Mix tapes. Phone calls. Handwritten love notes.

'' 'Eleanor & Park' could never happen now,'' they say. '' 'Eleanor & Park' is
happening now,'' I argue. ''Twenty years from now, you'll look back on the first
time you fell in love, and nothing will seem more romantic than text messages.
Or Snapchat. Or whatever it is you're doing right now behind your parents'
backs.''

Rainbow Rowell's new novel, ''Landline,'' will be published in July 2014.

DANA SPIOTTA: Technology changes everything and nothing. Perhaps the long form
of the novel contains an inherent dissidence to our embrace of online living.
Its connectivity is controlled, deep and highly focused; it is not a cacophony
of discrete ideas, not full of ad-driven juxtapositions, and it is not the
product of the ''hive brain.'' I think fiction is uniquely positioned to
interrogate how humans interact with technology, how it changes identity,
language and consciousness. My strategy often requires dislocating from the
slippery urgency of the present and turning to the near past, to outdated
technologies that were once ubiquitous and are now unloved. I'm interested in
how an actual phone call has become a grotesquely intimate thing, almost
jarring. We want immediacy with an end run around certain kinds of intimacy.

The uncanniness and mystery of new technology exists alongside the more obvious
fact that corporate entities devise new tech to keep us consuming the endlessly
new. The oppressive economics don't change the fact that successful technologies
must tap into some profound piece of the story of what we humans are and mean.

Dana Spiotta is the author, most recently, of the novel ''Stone Arabia.''

FREDERICK FORSYTH: In the 40-plus years since I wrote ''The Day of the Jackal''
there have been revolutionary changes. The illegal abstraction of classified
information, i.e., espionage, is totally transformed. Ditto the passing on of
that information, from the laborious roll of unexposed photos to the instant
copy-plus-transmit procedures available to any kid with an iPhone. But to my
great relief three things have not changed: People, in their loves and hates,
lusts and greeds, strengths and weaknesses, courage and cowardice, are much the
same. The readers still like the good guy to win and the bad one to meet an
unhappy end. And a rattling good story is still a rattling good story.

I am an unashamed dinosaur; I still seek out a plot-driven narrative with a
beginning, a middle and an end -- the last reached after a steadily accelerating
cadence. As to research, I eschew virtually all online fact searching because so
much is either rubbish or inadequate. The old ways still work best. I seek out
the expert steeped in knowledge of his subject and ask for an hour of his time.
I usually secure everything I need and probably several extraordinary anecdotes
that would never be on the Internet. The same applies to places -- even
hellholes like Mogadishu. It is a slog to haul the old bones across the world,
but I could never have described Somalia from 6,000 miles away. The obsession
with accuracy, deriving from my years in journalism, pays off. The readers seem
to like it.

Frederick Forsyth's most recent novel is ''The Kill List.''

DOUGLAS COUPLAND: I think the Internet has eroded 19th- and 20th-century notions
of a person's life being ''a story,'' or the notion that one's life needs to be
''a narrative.'' Instead we increasingly seem to be seeing ourselves as just one
more unit among seven billion other units. For the West this collective
denarration is sort of a comedown, but for a majority of people on earth, to be
included at the global dinner table is a big step up.

But if our lives are no longer stories, then they no longer have morals. So
what's the point of storytelling? I remind myself that aliens didn't come down
from space and hand us the Internet and smartphones. They were created by human
beings and, having been made by human beings, can only help bring about
manifestations of ourselves which until now haven't been possible. So we're now
in a new era when we are going to realize things about ourselves that we've
never seen before. It's scary and wondrous at the same time. I think that's what
a true contemporary writer need investigate.

Douglas Coupland's latest novel, ''Worst. Person. Ever,'' will be published in
April 2014.

TRACY K. SMITH: Back in the early 2000s, when surfing the Internet was still,
for me at least, somewhat new, I wrote a long fragmented poem that employed
shifting (and disappearing) points of view. I drew from a number of poetic
forebears, but it was the Internet that really unsettled my relationship to
diction, anonymity, history, space and time.

In a poem, association often gets you from one place to another, an image that
triggers a radical shift in context or tone. And it is association that governs
our experience of navigating the Web. Think of the huge leaps we take, the
strange paths we wander by simply following a string of links. Everything that
happens in a poem is governed by some kind of compression, but I suspect that
narrative in poems is at once bigger and stranger, and more tightly compressed,
than it was a generation ago. Then I remember ''The Waste Land,'' and I begin to
feel that the Internet has simply succeeded in reinvigorating a set of ambitions
and capacities that have been available to poets for a very long time.

Tracy K. Smith's most recent poetry collection, ''Life on Mars,'' won the 2012
Pulitzer Prize for poetry.

EMILY GIFFIN: Technology and gadgetry inevitably filter into my stories, but I
don't believe that such advances, even those that usher in huge cultural shifts,
fundamentally change how a story is conceived and constructed. Sure, new
technology can provide tools to move a plot along or reveal distinct aspects of
a character's personality in unique ways (such as the tendency of many to
overshare on social media outlets or incorporate truncated vernacular based on
Twitter-speak). But those are just cosmetic changes and really no different
from, say, describing a character's preferences in fashion or food or exercise
regimens. The priorities for the writer remain the same today as they did
yesterday -- to create compelling characters and an entertaining plot -- and how
much technology impacts those things is completely at the writer's discretion,
since he or she will always have sole control over the story. Where the impact
of technological advances is most felt is the immediacy with which people can
now reach, assess and critique you and your work. The constant din of those
outside voices is nearly unavoidable these days, making it increasingly
difficult to, as Stephen King put it, ''write with the door closed.'' But that's
a different discussion altogether.

Emily Giffin's new novel, ''The One and Only,'' will be published in May 2014.

ANDER MONSON: Living in the now, being blasted by tweets, all these little
narratives, is to experience the past. I mean the distant, darkened past: the
labyrinth, the one built by Daedalus to house the Minotaur. I can't think of a
more potent symbol for our collective daily experience: trying to find the line
of ascent in a wall of information; the trail of URLs I click through in my
morning's misinforming.

I clear the cache and wonder who might be watching, aggregating data, trying to
glean meaning from my meander. Even in the GPS zigzag through the grid to work I
can see I am a man in the maze. To be alive is to be dizzy and not to know
exactly where to go.

Anything I run across can light up the circuitry of my brain, and set me on an
adventure. To research strains of yeast; hiccup fetishists; the proper use of
inverse, obverse, converse and reverse; the ratio of main narrative to tangent,
of forward action to aside. What else do we do but quest, pursue meaning in the
information wash? Where does that storm sewer opening from the river into the
city's underneath go to, anyhow? I grab a headlamp and head in. It's long and
low and dark and stinks and extends for miles. Underneath the city is another
city. The one above begins to disappear. That's what we're after, isn't it? To
disappear? To venture into darkness, to let what we know or think we know recede
for an hour, a day, a novel's length, and see what meaning can be made of what
remains?

It's dark down here, and lonely. I am drawn mostly, insistently to the human
voice. How powerful and necessary the solo voice, the experience of being
someone, something else for a little while. This is and will remain literature's
killer app, the thing most impervious to threat by everything that's not the
word.

Ander Monson's most recent book is ''Vanishing Point.''

ELLIOTT HOLT: The elements of good storytelling are the same in any medium. What
changes is the way you deliver those elements. We tell stories differently on
film than we do on the page or on stage. (I prefer reading stories in printed
books, but as a writer, I'm interested in experimenting in other media.) So when
I decided to write a story on Twitter, I embraced the particulars of the form. I
created three different characters and set up three fake accounts, then tweeted
in their voices. I used the hallmarks of Twitter -- the way it unfolds in real
time, the performative nature of tweets, the hashtags and irony, even the typos
-- to create a mystery that comments on how social media feeds are now used for
evidence (to reconstruct timelines and verify suspects' locations). Technology
may change minutiae of plot, but the essential human drama will never change.
Good fiction depends on longing and subtext -- the tension between what people
say and what they want. Characters used to wait to receive letters; now they
wait for Facebook messages or Twitter mentions. Characters used to wonder about
lost loves; now they Google those ex-lovers. But they are still waiting and
wondering. They are still aching and yearning, trying to overcome obstacles.
Even in this hyper-connected digital age, there is desire and subtext, conflict
and loss. So there will always be good stories.

Elliott Holt is the author of ''You Are One of Them.''

VICTOR LaVALLE: If you want to learn the true nature of a child you have to
watch how she plays. If you want to learn the true nature of an adult you have
to watch how she does her job. Work is as vital as home life to most adults, but
literary fiction spends much less time detailing the former. I can't inhabit my
characters until I know what kind of work they do. This requires research
because my jobs for the last decade have been author and professor, and I'd like
to spare the world more author or professor novels. In the past a writer had to
go outside and get to know others before learning about their work, but the
Internet has made humanity more accessible for misanthropes like me. I read
blogs, tweets, Facebook posts and Reddit threads where people detail their jobs.
Whether an E.M.T., a Roman Catholic seminarian or a mother home-schooling her
children, I read them all. I'm looking for the workday routines, the body aches,
the small pleasures that kill monotony. All this reading may add nothing beyond
a secondary character's tossed-off line, but the world of my novel is more
tangible for it. Social media give me the privilege of learning about more
people than I could meet in my whole life. Taken together the Internet reads
like the grandest character-driven novel humanity has ever known. Not much plot
though.

Victor LaValle's latest novel, ''The Devil in Silver,'' has recently been
released in paperback.

LEE CHILD: Technology has changed practically everything to do with ''being a
writer'' -- for every one snail-mail letter we used to receive, we now get
10,000 e-mails; social media has become vital; and research has become
gloriously lateral and random -- to our huge advantage, I think. I was lurking
in a London police chat room, and found a strange reference to a ''list,'' which
I chased all over, until I found it written out on an American police
department's Web site: 11 ways to spot a suicide bomber. That became the very
effective -- and completely gifted -- opening to a novel. (I did other research
from books. I'm a late adopter, and somewhat halfhearted.)

But technology hasn't changed my narrative approach at all. For many suspense
writers, certain plot points are harder now -- the ''can't find a working pay
phone'' panic has been superseded, and flat cell batteries and weak signals feel
contrived as a consolation. My hero Jack Reacher is a determined Luddite, so he
neither suffers nor benefits, and his ignorance becomes part of his
characterization. In one book he sees a woman texting and asks what she's doing.
''Sending a written message by phone,'' she says. He replies: ''When did that
start?''

Lee Child is the author of ''Never Go Back,'' the latest in the Jack Reacher
series.

MEG CABOT: It's possible that if the first few books in the Princess Diaries
series had been written now instead of in the early 2000s, my heroine, Mia
Thermopolis, would have blogged or tweeted about her unhappiness at finding
herself heir to the throne of Genovia instead of keeping a diary. Having said
that, I realize tweeting and blogging aren't as popular as they once were;
teenagers now prefer Instagram, ''vlogs'' and Tumblr to record their daily
thoughts and feelings. Therein lies the problem for authors who reference
technology in their fiction: No sooner have their books gone to press than a
new, more exciting social networking platform has been unveiled, one that could
make what they've written about seem dated if, for instance, their books were
told entirely in Facebook posts.

This can be especially tough on writers for young adults. Teens are swift to
adopt anything new, and just as swift to drop it when something more exciting
comes along. Remember MySpace? I often wonder which popular social messaging
platform will become the new abandoned playground of the Internet, so I try to
avoid mentioning them by name to keep the book from seeming too dated.

But I confess to loving technology as much as any teenager, and I can't help
looking to the latest technology for exciting new narrative opportunities. My
new book, ''The Bride Wore Size 12,'' is a murder mystery set on a college
campus, and social media networking plays a large role in propelling the story.
Student reporters tweet updates on the campus blog, and eventually a possible
motive for the crime appears, a motive with which I think many people can
sympathize: How many of us have photos we would kill to keep from being posted
on the Internet? As technology advances, I will continue to mine its uses for
narrative gold, while also trying to steer clear of its various pitfalls, just
like everyone else!

Meg Cabot is the internationally best-selling author of books for children and
adults. Her novels have sold over 25 million copies worldwide.

TAO LIN: In Arthur C. Clarke's 1953 ''Childhood's End,'' mysterious
extraterrestrials peacefully invade Earth, ending war and overseeing the
formation of a world government. Culture and technology become relatively
stagnant. In response, a colony is formed called New Athens, in which a group of
artists and scientists work on a project called ''total identification.''

Clarke writes: ''The history of the cinema gave the clue to their actions. First
sound, then color, then stereoscopy, then Cinerama had made the old 'moving
pictures' more and more like reality itself. Where was the end of the story?
Surely, the final stage would be reached when the audience forgot it was an
audience, and became part of the action.'' Before any advances are made on
''total identification,'' humankind disappears, basically. Everyone under a
certain age is taken, over time, into a nonmaterial Overmind that has similarly
absorbed many other civilizations on other planets.

I don't think technology can have an unavoidable, nonlocal, non-trendy effect on
storytelling until it allows humankind to join a kind of Overmind -- to attain
some form of ''total identification.'' At which point, in the aloneness of any
mind, even an Overmind, storytelling will, I imagine, naturally re-emerge -- the
only difference being that, instead of humans communicating with humans, it will
be Overminds communicating with Overminds.

Tao Lin is the author of ''Taipei'' and six other books.

A. M. HOMES: Birds Eye Peas: a rule taught to me by a writing teacher who said
not to use brand names or products so specific they could quickly render your
stories out of date. Technology is a Birds Eye pea.

Birds Eye Peas -- I defrosted them and put them under the microscope in my last
novel, ''May We Be Forgiven.'' I wanted to explore the impact of technology on
how we live, communicate, do business, mate. We have gone from watching each
other clutch shoe-sized cellphones to not watching at all as we cross streets,
looking down at our screens, fingers flailing across glass keyboards, feeling
like we've had a stroke if our electronics are down for a day. I hurled myself
into the black hole of the ''inter-Web'' to research and concluded that Internet
hookups often reduce us to something less than animals -- who in their right
mind posts photos of their privates online? But maybe that's part of the issue.
Maybe the right brain, which recognizes faces (and privates?), can support the
peculiar splits in identity that seem to occur as people become another version
of themselves, their Internet avatar who allows them to play out what they might
in the past have kept private. And the notion of private has changed; thanks to
Facebook everyone seems to know everything and there is little embarrassment
about living entirely inside out -- but one would venture that while we're
showing all and telling all, we're not really saying much about what lurks
beneath, about what we're really thinking, feeling, desiring.

But the fact of the novel, the intimacy of reading has not changed, be it in
print or on e-readers. The act of reading is one to one, the connection between
author and audience goes deeper than an avatar or invented other can defend. The
novel speaks to us quietly and stays with us even as we sleep.

A. M. Homes's latest novel, ''May We Be Forgiven,'' won the 2013 Women's Prize
for Fiction.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/03/books/review/writing-bytes.html

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY BEN WISEMAN) (BR12
 BR13)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


