                             1065 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 30, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Is This a Sackbut I Hear Before Me?

BYLINE: By MICHAEL COOPER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1127 words


It is no ordinary Broadway pit band. Its period instruments -- sackbuts, shawms
and rauschpfeifes -- are decidedly more Akademie f√ºr Alte Musik Berlin than
Irving Berlin.

But these musicians are playing in a pair of productions, ''Twelfth Night'' and
''Richard III,'' running in repertory at the Belasco Theater, that aim for
authenticity. All the roles are played by males, as in Shakespeare's day;
beeswax candles light the stage; and the music, from costumed players in a
gallery above the stage, would be familiar to Elizabethan audiences.

The woman who brought sackbuts to Broadway is Claire van Kampen, the composer,
arranger and musical director of the shows, whose husband, Mark Rylance, is
having a star turn as both the Countess Olivia in ''Twelfth Night'' and Richard
III. The shows are not only giving period-instrument players one of the best
gigs available -- they came from far and wide for the auditions -- but are also
introducing works by Elizabethan composers like John Dowland and Thomas Morley
in an unstuffy way to audiences who may be unfamiliar with early music.

''How can you do Shakespeare and not have music be prominent?'' Ms. van Kampen
asked in a recent interview backstage at the Belasco. ''It's not possible!''

The music begins before the plays do. As the audience filed in to a recent
matinee of ''Twelfth Night,'' they were met by the strains of a hurdy-gurdy: a
string instrument played with a crank and keys whose droning sound brings
bagpipes to mind.

It was played by Arngeir Hauksson, a guitar and lute player originally from
Iceland who has played at Shakespeare's Globe in London for eight years and who,
like the other musicians, said he never expected to find himself performing on
Broadway. (He later explained that the hurdy-gurdy is ''sort of like a one-man
band,'' demonstrating how its crank turns a wheel that rubs the strings like a
bow on a violin, hitting drone and melody strings called chanterelles.)

Ms. van Kampen, a pianist and composer who has written extensively for the
theater, said she took a practical interest in Renaissance music and the
question of what was performed at Shakespeare's plays when she became the first
music director at the Globe, where these productions originated and where Mr.
Rylance was the first artistic director.

But she said her interest in Renaissance music was piqued earlier when, as a
girl, she met David Munrow, a recorder player and pioneer of the early-music
scene in England.

''He was just so charismatic and exciting,'' she recalled. ''I think that's what
sort of turned me on to the idea that these weren't weird sticks played by men
with beards and sandals. They actually could make really glorious sounds.''

Music, of course, plays a major role in Shakespeare's plays. ''Twelfth Night''
begins with it (''If music be the food of love, play on'') and ends with it
(with Feste, the fool, singing ''When that I was and a little tiny boy''). But
little is known for sure about what music was originally used.

Ms. van Kampen has taken a trial-and-error approach to discover what actually
works in the theater, researching Elizabethan composers, searching for viable
melodies (''I spend a lot of time trying to find source material that is not
'Greensleeves,' say'') and figuring out what kind of instruments and ensembles
work best in different surroundings.

''There were scholars that had got Ph.D.'s from Oxbridge, predicated on the
basis that Shakespeare's music was this, that or the other,'' she said. But she
said that she found that many of the academic theories did not work well when
she tried to put them into practice at the new open-air Globe, which aims to
recreate Shakespeare's theater.

''When you try out a lot of those ideas in the space, you find very quickly that
that just can't be,'' she said. ''For lots of reasons -- not just because we've
got aircraft flying over now, but because a lot of those instruments are too
delicate and just unwieldy for the open air.''

Her ''Twelfth Night'' features melancholy lute music for Orsino's court, a pipe
and tabor for the fool, and an arrangement of a Morley piece for the song that
ends the play. The darker world of ''Richard III'' has fanfares for the battles,
subdued recorder music for the ''Despair, and die!'' ghosts of Bosworth Field,
and, in the court scenes, plenty of shawm music, which she said was known for
its sinister aspect.

The ensemble, which has changed during the run, features musicians who took many
routes to Broadway, with several overlapping in early-music groups.

Emily Baines, who has played at the Globe and is studying for a doctor of music
degree at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, and Priscilla Herreid, a
member of Piffaro, a Renaissance band, were among the woodwind players
performing on recorders that bore little resemblance to the squeaky ones foisted
upon schoolchildren, and shawms, which are ancestors of the oboe.

The sackbut section -- think of Renaissance trombones -- included Greg Ingles,
the music director of Dark Horse Consort, a 17th-century brass ensemble. In
addition to the hurdy-gurdy, Mr. Hauksson played the cittern, lute and theorbo.
The Belasco is just small enough that the players require no amplification, a
rarity in modern musicals.

Christopher R. Wilson, a professor at the University of Hull in England, who has
written extensively on music in Shakespeare, said that of the 80 or so songs in
the plays, music that can be identified with early productions survives in only
a handful of cases.

He praised Ms. van Kampen's work, and wrote approvingly of the music she used in
an earlier version of the current production of ''Twelfth Night,'' which
originated more than a decade ago, in a paper presented to the Shakespeare
Association of America. ''While it lacks scholarly rigor,'' he said in an email,
''it provides the right sort of music in the right sort of way.''

Ms. van Kampen's next project will be music for a new production of John
Webster's play ''The Duchess of Malfi'' in London in January that is set to
inaugurate a new Jacobean-style indoor theater being built by the Globe, where
Ms. van Kampen is now the associate for early modern music.

One reason so little is known about the original music in Shakespeare, Ms. van
Kampen said she suspects, is that tunes were probably switched in and out of the
plays, depending on what songs were popular at the time, or which musicians were
available.

''In Shakespeare's period, they weren't looking at historical music, or
historical clothing,'' she said. ''It was all contemporary, it was all pop -- it
was like musicals. You don't want yesterday's tunes. You want the tune that is
being bandied round Bankside and the brothels and the stews, and that everyone
goes, 'Oh yeah, that tune!' ''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/30/arts/music/shakespeare-brings-period-music-to-
broadway.html

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Greg Ingles, near right, and Daniel Meyers, on alto and bass
sackbuts, in Shakespeare at the Belasco. (C1)
 Claire van Kampen, center, with the musicians, from left, Arngeir Hauksson, Sam
Budish, Greg Ingles, Daniel Meyers, Emily Baines, Elizabeth Hardy and Priscilla
Herreid, at the Belasco Theater. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY VICTOR J. BLUE FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES) (C5)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


