                             1039 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 5, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Sounds of a Torn Region United in Many Languages

BYLINE: By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIM

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 457 words


At the end of ''The Cycles of Life: A Musical Exploration of the Balkans,''
conceived and presented by the Catalan early-music explorer Jordi Savall at
Alice Tully Hall on Sunday, five soloists sang five different songs at once. In
five different languages.

Layered on top of the Hebrew traditional ''Torah'' sung by the Israeli cantor
Lior Elmaleh, the Turkish tenor Gursoy Dincer sang an Ottoman song about love on
the muddy road to Uskudar, while the soprano Irini Derebei delivered a Greek ode
to a dark-eyed maid with a beauty spot on her cheek. The French baritone Marc
Mauillon's rendition of a Sephardic romance (in Ladino) blended with a Serbian
folk song about a lass with gold-tangled hair that the folk singer Stoimenka
Outchikova-Nedialkova sang dressed in a traditional Bulgarian costume.

Each had sung the same verses before, alone, and the subtle variations in vocal
style had come to the fore. Now, as their entwined voices wove in and out of the
accompanying ensemble of ancient and exotic instruments, the common template
stood out clearly.

If there was a mantra underlying this wistfully beautiful concert (part of
Lincoln Center's White Light Festival), it was ''All is one.'' The survey of
traditional Jewish, Christian and Muslim music from the Balkans highlighted the
cultural cohesion of that politically fragmented part of the world. Though the
languages changed from song to song, the musical grammar remained constant,
ruled by hypnotic reiterations of the reach-and-fall-back curlicues made up of
augmented seconds, the signature interval of Eastern music.

Mr. Savall, who played two medieval precursors of the violin, the rebec and the
vielle, in this program, is something of a musical archaeologist. In previous
projects, he has unearthed musical connections across the Mediterranean and
reconstructed those of pre-Expulsion Spain. ''The Cycles of Life'' presents
fruits from his latest dig, which also gave rise to the recording ''Balkan
Spirit.''

Joined by the excellent roster of instrumentalists who make up Mr. Savall's
ensemble Hesp√®rion XXI, he structured his musical exploration along the arc of
human life, from songs about creation and birth to celebrations of love and
marriage to mature reflections on exile and death.

But above all, the program highlighted music as a life-sustaining force. From
the opening drone that gave rise to Mr. Elmaleh's soulful rendition of ''Aleph,
mem, shin,'' a setting of a Kabbalistic text, to the heart-wrenching Armenian
exile lament played by Haig Sarikouyoumdjian on the double-reeded duduk, the
music reflected the joy, agony and above all fertility of the Balkans.

The White Light Festival continues through Nov. 23 at various New York
locations; whitelightfestival.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/05/arts/music/jordi-savalls-the-cycles-of-life-at
-alice-tully-hall.html

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Cycles of Life: Lior Elmaleh, far left, Haig
Sarikouyoumdjian and Irini Derebei in this concert of Balkan music led by Jordi
Savall at Alice Tully Hall. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROYUKI ITO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


