                             1028 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 31, 2013 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Newly Released

BYLINE: By JOHN WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1077 words


This month, four novels that explore the needs and fragility of human
psychology, and two books about life (and the search for life) far from Earth.

FIREFLYBy Janette Jenkins165 pages. Europa Editions. $15.

This brief, beautifully observed novel finds NoÃ«l Coward in his last years, at
Firefly, his home in Jamaica, where he died of a heart attack at 73 in the early
1970s. The urbane Coward is the perfect figure to mine for both poignancy and
humor at a stage of his life when he is, in his own words, ''a professional
hermit.'' Looking at his reflection, he sees ''an overgrown reptile.''
(''Whatever happened to the face-lift?'' he wonders.) Ms. Jenkins allows her
fading protagonist the occasional bon mot. ''Love hurts,'' Coward says, ''but
it's curable.'' She juxtaposes his sunset against the aspirations of a young
Jamaican servant named Patrice, who dreams of living in London and working at
the Ritz. Coward's reluctance to write a letter of recommendation to the hotel
-- whether he simply can't be bothered, or because he's jealous of a young life
in London, or because he cares for Patrice more than he lets on -- constitutes
the book's minor but moving drama.

SEX IS FORBIDDENBy Tim Parks290 pages. Arcade. $24.95.

Beth Marriot works in a kitchen at a Buddhist retreat in this fictional
counterpart of sorts to ''Teach Us to Sit Still,'' Mr. Parks's erudite 2010
memoir about turning to meditation to treat chronic pain. Beth is a singer whose
spiritual thoughts carry an echo of rock 'n' roll choruses: ''By 30 I reckon
I'll be purified or dead.'' She's attempting to recover from -- or to hide from
-- a tangled romantic life and her guilt about an incident that left an
acquaintance in a coma. While at the silent retreat center, she discovers and
begins reading the journal of a male resident. This conceit, though a bit too
convenient, allows Mr. Parks to lay out the experiences of both Beth and that
man, GH, each gaining something from the mindful practice while still struggling
mightily for more. ''I have felt my body melt into air,'' Beth says. But, she
adds, ''it hasn't brought me peace.''

THE NIGHT GUESTBy Fiona McFarlane241 pages. Faber & Faber. $26.

Ruth is a widow living in a beach house in Australia. She feels soothed by the
presence of the sea ''in an indefinable way, just as she imagined a plant might
be by Mozart.'' She has begun vividly imagining the presence of a tiger in the
next room in the middle of the night. She calls the animal her ''consequential
visitor,'' a term that also applies to Frida, a pushy but helpful woman who
appears one day, claiming to be a home aide paid by the government. Ruth recalls
her childhood years spent in Fiji, where her father was a doctor, and makes
contact after many decades with Richard, an older man who once broke her heart.
Frida, undoubtedly useful to Ruth, begins acting in increasingly suspicious
ways. Ms. McFarlane's debut, filled with lively writing and convincing
psychological portraiture, is a slowly unfolding mystery that is less about who
done it than about the vagaries of ''that sticky organ,'' the human brain.

HOW TO BE A GOOD WIFEBy Emma Chapman273 pages. St. Martin's Press. $24.99.

Marta has been married for 25 years to Hector, who is 20 years her senior. She
begins seeing an apparition, a disheveled blond girl. ''Her hips are narrow and
wrong-looking, as if her legs have been attached at a strange angle.'' Is the
vision trying to tell Marta something about her own dimly remembered past? About
the potentially disturbing way in which she met her husband? Ms. Chapman's first
novel revolves around a stark mystery: Is Marta crazy, or does it just benefit
Hector for her to think she is? Marta's unreliability and the possibility of
Hector's crime are established so early on that the spare story eventually
begins to drag. Even the blond girl's appearance, initially startling, happens
frequently enough to lose its ghoulish shock. Despite the thinness of the plot,
the Hitchcockian flavor of the book's open-ended finish will satisfy readers who
like their chills left to the imagination.

AN ASTRONAUT'S GUIDE TO LIFE ON EARTHBy Col. Chris Hadfield295 pages. Little,
Brown and Company. $28.

The astronaut Chris Hadfield, the first Canadian to walk in space, has become a
star on Twitter, where nearly a million followers enjoy his stunning photos and
videos about life in zero gravity. His charm intermittently survives the
transition to the page. He emphasizes the importance of being ''focused less on
the magical than the mundane,'' in a profession that trains you to ask, ''O.K.,
what's the next thing that will kill me?'' He bemoans not getting to pick fellow
travelers, making his lofty position relatable to office drones with noisy
cubicle neighbors. ''No one wants to go to space with a jerk,'' he writes. But
for a subject this naturally thrilling, Mr. Hadfield makes an overly earnest
tour guide -- as anyone with the rigorous discipline necessary to be an
astronaut might. He is not Anthony Bourdain, and this is not ''NASA
Confidential.'' ''Anticipating problems and figuring out how to solve them is
actually the opposite of worrying: it's productive,'' goes a typical line. This
memoir is part fascinating view, part Boy Scout manual.

FIVE BILLION YEARS OF SOLITUDEThe Search for Life Among the StarsBy Lee
Billings294 pages. Current. $27.95.

At one point in this survey of our efforts to find company in the universe and
to fend off planetary extinction, an astrophysicist named Greg Laughlin suggests
moving Earth out near Mars by using large comets to deflect some of Jupiter's
''orbital energy'' over the course of hundreds of millions of years. Ideas like
that one will leave readers who aren't rocket scientists slack-jawed. Mr.
Billings writes as accessibly as possible about a field in which careers and
reputations are ''forged or shattered on the barest probabilistic whiffs of
planets emerging from a statistical haze.'' The astronomer Frank Drake, a
pioneer in the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, tells Mr. Billings:
''Right now there could well be messages from the stars flying right through
this room. Through you and me. And if we had the right receiver set up properly,
we could detect them.'' Mr. Billings's book is a reminder of the incredible
strides we've made in charting the cosmos, and of how even our most advanced
efforts may not be enough to detect and communicate with other life if, in the
end, it's out there.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/31/books/new-books-by-tim-parks-emma-chapman-and-
janette-jenkins.html

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


