                             1000 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 8, 2013 Sunday 8:13 PM EST

How Iran can help end our Mideast war

BYLINE: Andrew J. Bacevich

SECTION: Outlook; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 1403 words


What Jimmy Carter began, Barack Obama is ending. Washington is bringing down the
curtain on its 30-plus-year military effort to pull  the Islamic world into
conformity with American interests and expectations. It's about time.

Back in 1980, when his promulgation of the Carter Doctrine launched that effort,
Carter acted with only a vague understanding of what might follow. Yet
circumstance - the overthrow of the shah in Iran, the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan - compelled him to act. Or more accurately, the domestic political
uproar triggered by those events compelled the president, facing a tough
reelection campaign, to make a show of doing something. What ensued was the
long-term militarization of U.S. policy throughout the region.

Now, without fanfare, President Obama is effectively revoking Carter's doctrine.
The U.S. military presence in the region is receding. When Obama posited in his
second inaugural address that "enduring security and lasting peace do not
require perpetual war," he was not only recycling a platitude; he was also
acknowledging the folly and futility of the enterprise in which U.S. forces had
been engaged. Having consumed vast quantities of blood and treasure while giving
Americans little to show in return, that enterprise is now ending.

Like Carter in 1980, Obama finds himself with few alternatives. At home,
widespread anger, angst and mortification obliged Carter to begin girding the
nation to fight for the greater Middle East. To his successors, Carter
bequeathed a Pentagon preoccupied with ramping up its ability to flex its
muscles anywhere from Egypt to Pakistan. The bequest proved a mixed blessing,
fostering the illusion that military muscle, dexterously employed, might put
things right. Today, widespread disenchantment with the resulting wars and
quasi-wars prohibits Obama from starting new ones.

Successive military disappointments, not all of Obama's making, have curbed his
prerogatives as commander in chief. Rather than being the decider, he ratifies
decisions effectively made elsewhere. In calling off a threatened U.S. attack on
Syria, for example, the president was acknowledging what opinion polls and
Congress (not to mention the British Parliament ) had already made plain:
Support for any further military adventures to liberate or pacify Muslims has
evaporated. Americans still profess to love the troops. But they've lost their
appetite for war.

Two centuries ago, the Duke of Wellington remarked that "nothing except a battle
lost can be half so melancholy as a battle won." In our  day, great battles are
rare, while wars have become commonplace. Victory, meanwhile, seems a lost art.
Nothing is half so melancholy as to compare the expectations informing recent
American wars when they began - Enduring Freedom! - with the outcomes actually
achieved. So in Obama's Washington, moralism is out, and with good reason. Only
nations with a comfortable surfeit of power can permit themselves the luxury of
allowing moral considerations to shape basic policy.

Now, for the moment at least, realism has regained favor. In this context, that
means aligning aspirations with available assets, and distinguishing between
interests that are vital and those that are merely desirable. In Afghanistan,
promises of enduring freedom withdrawn, realism offers "Resolute Support" as a
consolation prize. When Obama's national security adviser tells the New York
Times that the president refuses to "be consumed 24/7 by one region" and intends
to reassess U.S. Middle East policy "in a very critical and kind of
no-holds-barred way," that's realism seeping through the Washingtonese.

None of this is to suggest that America's War for the Greater Middle East has
ended. Drone  strikes, the Obama administration's military signature, continue.
Yet missile strikes alone, whether targeting Pakistan, Afghanistan, Yemen or
Somalia, serve no larger strategic purpose. Wellington for one would have
recognized Obama's drone campaign for what it is: a rear-guard action, designed
to allow the main body to withdraw.

This de-escalation is not without risks. For as America's War for the Greater
Middle East winds down, it leaves the Islamic world in worse condition -
besieged by radicalism, wracked by violence, awash with anti-Americanism - than
back in 1980. The list of dictators the United States has toppled or abandoned
and of terrorists it has assassinated is impressively long. But any benefits
accruing from these putative successes have been few. Ask Afghans. Ask Iraqis.
Ask Libyans. Or ask any American who has been paying attention. (Just don't
bother asking anyone who works inside the Beltway, where the failure of the
local NFL franchise to win games produces more worry than the U.S. military's
failure to win wars.)

Back in 1979, the "loss" of Iran provided much of the impetus for launching
America's War for the Greater Middle East. The shah's overthrow had cost the
United States an unsavory henchman, his place taken by radicals apparently
consumed with hatred for the Great Satan.

At the time, the magnitude of the policy failure staggered Washington. It was as
bad as - maybe worse than - the "loss" of China 30 years before. Of course, what
had made that earlier failure so difficult to take was the presumption that
China had been ours to lose in the first place. Discard that presumption, and
doing business with Red China just might become a possibility. Cue Richard
Nixon, a realist if there ever was one. By accepting China's loss, he turned it
to America's advantage, at least in the short run.

So too with Iran today. The passage of time, along with more than a few
miscalculations by Iran's leadership, has tempered the Islamic republic's
ambitions. One imagines Nixon, in whatever precincts of the great beyond he
inhabits, itching to offer advice:  Accept the "loss" of Iran, which will never
return to America's orbit anyway, and turn it to U.S. advantage.

In their heyday, neoconservatives boasted that while anyone could go to Baghdad,
real men hankered to go to Tehran. But as a venue for displaying American power,
Baghdad proved a bust. In Tehran lies the possibility of finding a way out of
perpetual war. Although by no means guaranteed, the basis for a deal exists: We
accept the Islamic republic, they accept the regional status quo. They get
survival, we get a chance to repair self-inflicted wounds. It's the same bargain
that Nixon offered Mao: Keep your revolution at home, and we'll make our peace
with it. Negotiations over Iran's nuclear program provide the medium for
achieving this larger end.

Any such deal would surely annoy Saudi Arabia and Israel, each for its own
reasons committed to casting Iran as an existential threat. Obama just might
choose to let them fret.

Although Americans have not yet fully digested the news, the United States no
longer must defer to the Saudis. North American reserves of oil and natural gas
are vastly greater than they appeared to be just a few years ago. As the
prospect of something approximating energy independence beckons, the terms of
the U.S.-Saudi alliance - they pump, we protect - are ripe for revision. Not so
long ago, it seemed really, really important to keep the Saudi royal family
happy. Far less so today.

Much the same applies to Israel. Easily the strongest power in its neighborhood
and the only one possessing a nuclear arsenal, the Jewish state privileges its
own security over all other considerations. It has every right to do so. What
doesn't follow is that Washington should underwrite or turn a blind eye to
Israeli actions that run counter to U.S. interests, as is surely the case with
continued colonization of the occupied territories. Just as Israel disregards
U.S. objections to its expansion of settlements in the West Bank, the United
States should refuse to allow Israeli objections to determine its policy toward
Iran.

The exit from America's misadventures in the region is through the door marked
"Tehran." Calling off the War for the Greater Middle East won't mean that the
political, social and economic problems roiling that part of the world will
suddenly go away. They just won't be problems that Uncle Sam is expected to
solve. In this way, a presidency that began with optimism and hope but has
proved such a letdown may yet achieve something notable.

outlook@washpost.com

Read more from Outlook, friend us on Facebook, and follow us on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved
ï»¿
