                             1097 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 28, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's on Saturday

BYLINE: By ADAM W. KEPLER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 733 words


8 P.M. (HBO) WARM BODIES (2013) ''The zombie romance 'Warm Bodies' is cute and
amusing enough to catch on cable one day, where its star-crossed, blood-drenched
lovers will eventually present sweet relief from the apocalyptic freakout that
is the AMC series 'The Walking Dead,' '' Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York
Times about this twist on the zombie genre, written and directed by Jonathan
Levine and based on the novel by Isaac Marion. Nicholas Hoult plays a zombie;
Teresa Palmer, above with Mr. Hoult, is Julie, the living girl he strangely does
not want to eat; and John Malkovich plays Julie's father, who threatens to keep
the star-crossed lovers apart.

NOON (TNT) VALKYRIE (2008) Tom Cruise, left, dons an eye patch and ultrashiny
boots to portray Col. Claus von Stauffenberg, a German Army officer who tried to
assassinate Hitler and seize control of the Reich, in this World War II drama
directed by Bryan Singer. Kenneth Branagh, Bill Nighy, Tom Wilkinson, Terence
Stamp and Eddie Izzard play the rebellious officers Stauffenberg conspired with.
Manohla Dargis, writing in The Times, said that Mr. Cruise ''gives a fine,
typically energetic performance in a film that requires nothing more of him than
a profile and vigor.''

8 P.M. (Food Network) CUPCAKE WARS Bo Derek is the guest judge for this episode,
in which four bakers compete for a $10,000 prize and the chance to have their
cupcakes featured at the 2013 Breeders' Cup World Championships at Santa Anita
racetrack in California.

9 P.M. (BBC America) ATLANTIS Hercules (Mark Addy) visits the witch Circe (Lucy
Cohu) in a misguided attempt to win the love of Medusa (Jemima Rooper). On ''The
Graham Norton Show,'' at 10, the host chats with Len Goodman from ABC's
''Dancing With the Stars,'' the actress Julie Walters and the rapper Tinie
Tempah.

9 P.M. (Syfy) THE ADJUSTMENT BUREAU (2011) Matt Damon, his toothy grin hinting
at a young Robert F. Kennedy, portrays David Norris, a Democratic son of
Brooklyn and a favorite in the New York race for the United States Senate. That
is, until a photo from his past sinks his campaign, and he meets Elise (Emily
Blunt), a dancer who innocently sends him veering off the path plotted for him
by a team of mystery men. Their plan does not include Emily, or free will on
David's part. Now he must decide whether to give in to their machinations or
reclaim his life. If George Nolfi, who directed this film and wrote the
screenplay, based on a short story by Philip K. Dick, ''doesn't go deep in 'The
Adjustment Bureau,' drilling down to where it hurts (he would rather entertain
than pain you), he skates on the gray-blue surfaces of his film with
confidence,'' Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times.

11:30 P.M. (TBS) I LOVE YOU, MAN (2009) Paul Rudd plays Peter Klaven, a girl's
guy (code for wuss) without a male friend. Jason Segel is Sydney Fife, a guy's
guy so secure in his maleness that he wears Ugg boots and shorts to walk his
teeny dog. The two meet cute at an open house and, voil√†!, Peter has a best man
to stand by his side at his wedding to Zooey (Rashida Jones) -- if the wedding
ends up happening. Writing in The Times, Manohla Dargis called the film ''a
fitfully funny comedy that owes much to Judd Apatow, the king of such sublimated
man-on-man affairs,'' adding that the director, John Hamburg, ''doesn't do
anything with the camera, but he sets a nice, easygoing tone for the actors.''
Andy Samberg plays Peter's masculine gay brother; J. K. Simmons and Jane Curtin
are their parents; and Lou Ferrigno is himself.

Midnight (MTV) GET HIM TO THE GREEK (2010) Russell Brand, right, reprises Aldous
Snow, his snake-hipped British rocker from ''Forgetting Sarah Marshall,'' in
Nicholas Stoller's comedy about a record label drone (Jonah Hill) dispatched to
transport Snow -- a wreck after the failure of his latest album -- from London
to the Greek, a concert hall in Los Angeles. As played by ''the brilliantly
unpredictable'' Mr. Brand, Snow ''is more than a pop culture museum piece or a
MacGruber-like bit of sketch comedy nonsense,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.
Mr. Hill ''makes a fine visual and temperamental foil,'' he added. ''The two of
them are like the Trylon and Perisphere of comedy.'' The result, Mr. Scott said,
is ''the bawdy-sweet mixture that is the signature of the Judd Apatow school of
screen comedy.'' (Mr. Apatow was a producer of the movie.) ADAM W. KEPLER

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/28/arts/television/whats-on-saturday.html

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAN THIJS/SUMMIT ENTERTAINMENT)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


