                             1054 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 22, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

When How It Looks Matters More Than What It Says

BYLINE: By KEN JOHNSON

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; ART REVIEW;
Pg. 28

LENGTH: 1058 words


As you read this, you're probably not paying much attention to what the letters
look like. More likely, you're focusing on the words and sentences that the
letters spell, and what they are saying. Some artists, however, have made it
their business to direct attention to what letters, words, sentences, texts and
books look like more or less apart from what they mean. Nine of these are in
''Drawing Time, Reading Time,'' a thought-provoking show at the Drawing Center.

But there's a second, even more intriguing exhibition here called
''Dickinson/Walser: Pencil Sketches'' that displays handwritten manuscripts by
two famous writers: Emily Dickinson and the early 20th century Swiss writer
Robert Walser. Together, the two exhibitions prompt mind-stretching reflection
on the complicated relations between writing, communication and reality.

Dickinson wrote drafts of her poems in pencil on torn scraps of paper and the
insides of cut-open envelopes. Literary content aside, the examples here
resemble grocery lists made by a hurried domestic. It looks as if she were
catching poetic inspirations on the fly, jotting them down before they could
evanesce.

Walser's texts appear more purposefully formed. He wrote in an antique German on
small rectangles of paper and cardboard in letters too tiny to be easily read by
naked eyes, and he compressed his words into small, dense blocks of text.
Perhaps writing in this manner was a necessary part of his creative process, as
if putting letters on paper this way had the effect of concentrating his mind,
as ritualistic incantations do.

Whatever their differences, Dickinson's and Walser's manuscripts exemplify a
kind of writing meant to be legible not by others primarily but by the person
who produced it. What that sort of writing is not, however, is ''asemic,'' a
word for mark-making that resembles writing but actually has no linguistic
meaning.

Asemic, elegantly calligraphic works in ''Drawing Time, Reading Time'' by Pavel
BÃ¼chler, Mirtha Dermisache and Guy de Cointet are like scat singing, pure visual
music. In a similar vein, Nina Papaconstantinou creates a kind of minimalist,
visual drone by hand copying onto single sheets all the pages of whole books
using blue carbon paper to transfer her handwriting. The illegible, dense field
of fine blue marks of one piece represents the entire text of Angela Carter's
''The Bloody Chamber.'' While not asemic, typewritten works of concrete poetry
from the 1960s by Carl Andre suggest a form of chanting.

Not to be confused with mystic or surrealistic automatic writing, which is
supposed to tap into unconscious depths, asemic writing in art highlights the
relationship between ''the written word's communicative transparency on the one
hand and visual art's material opacity on the other,'' as the organizer of both
exhibitions and the Drawing Center's curator, Claire Gilman, puts it in her
exhibition catalog essay. That in turn invites thought about the nature of
meaning itself: Is it some kind of transcendental substance that may or may not
be incarnated in some physical form? Is the relationship between meaning and
material form like the relationship between your body and your soul?

For some artists in the show, verbal meaning apparently matters, but to what
extent is hard to say. In 1993, Sean Landers hand wrote on 451 yellow legal
pages an entertaining, autobiographical account of his trials and tribulations
as an artist and a pursuer of sexual, romantic and other gratifications. It's
titled ''[sic].'' All the pages are here pinned up in order in a wall-filling
grid. The installation makes it impossible to read the whole and renders
uncertain exactly what ''[sic]'' is. Is it art or literature? Is it to be read,
looked at or thought about?

A richer relationship between form and content animates Deb Sokolow's series of
poster-size drawings, ''Chapter 13. Oswald and Your Cousin Irving.'' Words
rendered by large, neatly made letters as well as diagrams and photographic
images tell a remarkable story about the assassination of John F. Kennedy and
its aftermath. At the start, you learn that Ms. Sokolow had an older cousin who
was a mentor to a teenage Lee Harvey Oswald. The drawings go on to ponder
mysterious circumstances relating to the assassination, including that Mary
Pinchot Meyer, a painter whose diary revealed trysts with Kennedy (she was part
of a circle of artists and intellectuals who were exploring psychedelic drugs
and orgone therapy), was murdered less than a year after Kennedy.

The eccentrically forensic style of Ms. Sokolow's zany project reflects her
effort to comprehend the facts and rumors, as if she herself were a justifiably
paranoid character in a Thomas Pynchon novel.

The book as a physical object is the ostensible subject of carefully made,
realistic pencil drawings by Allen Ruppersberg and Molly Springfield. Like
everything else in both exhibitions, they are paradoxical: Writing is material,
and, then again, it's not. Made in the 1970s, Mr. Ruppersberg's works represent
books like Baudelaire's ''Les Fleurs du Mal'' and Strunk and White's ''The
Elements of Style'' lying closed on undefined surfaces. What's the relationship
between what these volumes look like and what they contain?

Ms. Springfield's drawings are from a 2007 series called ''The World is Full of
Objects,'' whose title refers to the conceptualist Douglas Huebler's famous
statement, ''The world is full of objects, more or less interesting; I do not
wish to add any more.'' From a distance, they appear to be a grad student's
smudgy, black-and-white photocopies from library books. Up close, you see that
they are lovingly hand-drawn copies of photocopies of pages from books about
conceptual art of the 1960s, including Lucy R. Lippard's ''Six Years: The
Dematerialization of the Art Object.''

What is an object, anyway? Must it be something material? Can a concept be an
object? Are words and poems objects? What about sounds, actions and events? If
an object exists only in a photograph, is it still an object? Do imaginary
objects count? If you allow that a question can be an object, then such queries
could be the primary objects of Ms. Springfield's beautifully realized,
brain-teasing drawings.

Both shows continue through Jan. 12 at the Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street,
SoHo; (212) 219-2166, drawingcenter.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/22/arts/design/drawing-time-reading-time-at-the-d
rawing-center.html

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: An envelope Emily Dickinson used to  jot down thoughts is
displayed in  ''Dickinson/Walser: Pencil  Sketches.'' It exemplifies writing
meant to be legible to the person who  produced it, not necessarily to others.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY EMILY DICKINSON COLLECTION, AMHERST COLLEGE ARCHIVES  & SPECIAL
COLLECTIONS)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


