                             1068 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 2, 2013 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Band With Some History Brings Heft to the New Place in Brooklyn

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 611 words


Rough Trade Records garnered some New York City cachet when it presented
Television at the intimate club attached to the record store on Friday and
Saturday nights. Rough Trade, a London institution since the punk era, opened
its outpost in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, on Nov. 25. The club, with a capacity of
300, is very promising: a high-ceilinged box with utilitarian industrial d√©cor,
clear sightlines, a balcony and, for Television, the superbly clear sound that
the music demands.

Television earned a place in New York rock history as the band that, through
regular gigs and a gathering scene, turned a Lower East Side dive called CBGB &
OMFUG into the cradle of punk-rock in the mid-1970s. The band's own history has
been the definition of sporadic. Television -- led by the songwriter, singer and
guitarist Tom Verlaine -- released two albums in its first years together,
1973-78, and a third in 1992, when it briefly reunited. It regrouped again in
2001, and has toured on and off since then.

In 2004, Television's other founding guitarist, Richard Lloyd, angrily quit the
band and was replaced by Jimmy Rip, who had played on Mr. Verlaine's solo
albums. A new Television album has been promised for years. But on Friday night,
when an audience member shouted to ask when it might appear, Mr. Verlaine
ignored the question.

The sound Television came up with in the mid-1970s, and has seen no reason to
refashion since, isn't what hardened into punk; the music doesn't hammer, and it
can take its time. Television drew on both the Minimalistic New York City drone
of the Velvet Underground and on psychedelic jam bands: improvising, drawing on
the modal scales of raga and Middle Eastern music, savoring detail and filigree.
Television's music holds glimpses of the blues, doo-wop, soul, surf-rock, the
Beatles and the Byrds, but with a distinctive lucidity, each separate component
in focus. Mr. Verlaine's lyrics evade the obvious, preferring implications and
surrealism: ''I fell right into the arms of Venus de Milo,'' he sang in the
first song of Friday's set.

The band's two guitars rarely stick to lead and rhythm roles. Songs often begin
with overlapping, question-and-answer riffs; and from there, the two guitars
constantly realign. Mr. Rip has fully absorbed the way Mr. Lloyd and Mr.
Verlaine worked together: weaving, tangling, rebounding, teasing, pulling far
apart and eventually meshing anew. The sound of each riff and phrase matters:
pinging, bending, mewing, keening a long melody or clenching tight on a chord.
With Fred Smith's concise bass lines to provide stability, Billy Ficca, on
drums, dissects rock beats like a jazz drummer, leaving out some obvious accents
and featuring different parts of his kit -- tom-toms, cymbals, rims -- in
different songs.

Mr. Verlaine's strangulated tenor voice sounds calmer and less biting now than
it did on Television's albums. But Television's old dynamics were intact,
especially in the set's centerpiece: an unrecorded song called ''Persia'' that
has long been in the band's repertory, and that earned every second of a
15-minute jam.

Driven by a terse, hypnotic bass riff, it ranged in and out of an almost
conspiratorial quiet, with Mr. Verlaine floating his guitar lines distantly
overhead and singing words along with them. It moved through Mr. Rip's more
aggressive guitar jabs, through volleys of shifting rhythm and up to dissonant,
syncopated chords that the guitarists flung in unison, then switched into a sly,
pithy bolero and rose through another jagged crescendo. After all these years,
the musicians in Television were still listening to one another, intently.
Where's that new album, anyway?

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/02/arts/music/television-plays-rough-trades-brook
lyn-outpost.html

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Television: , featuring, from left, Fred Smith, Tom Verlaine,
Billy Ficca and Jimmy Rip, at Rough Trade NYC in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY BRIAN HARKIN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


