                             1113 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 5, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Spy Who Came Into the Fold

BYLINE: By FRED KAPLAN.

Fred Kaplan is a Slate columnist, the Edward R. Murrow fellow at the Council on
Foreign Relations, and the author of ''The Insurgents: David Petraeus and the
Plot to Change the American Way of War.''

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1349 words


COMPANY MANThirty Years of Controversy and Crisis in the CIA

By John RizzoIllustrated. 320 pp. Scribner. $28.

The main thing to know about ''Company Man,'' John Rizzo's memoir of his three
decades as a C.I.A. lawyer, including seven years as the agency's chief legal
officer, is that its title is not the slightest bit ironic.

Rizzo joined the Central Intelligence Agency in the wake of Senator Frank
Church's 1975 hearings on its dark, secret history of assassinations, coups and
myriad black-bag jobs. The agency was hiring a stock of young outside lawyers --
''Church babies,'' they called themselves -- whose lack of C.I.A. ''baggage,''
as Rizzo puts it, might incline them ''to spot and deter any future abuses.''

Yet in Rizzo, the agency nabbed a true believer. The Church hearings might have
left Langley ''dispirited and on the defensive,'' but this 28-year-old recruit
was, by his own account, ''too starry-eyed'' to notice. ''I thought being at the
C.I.A. was extremely cool,'' he recalls. ''All I knew was that I was part of an
organization with which I was already unabashedly in love.''

These are understandable sentiments in a callow young man, subsumed in the
esprit de corps of ''an exclusive, selective, secret club'' that ''no one on the
outside could ever really fully know or understand.'' But judging from his
memoir, Rizzo never snapped out of his thraldom, and the book suffers from the
lack not merely of a critical perspective -- which might be excusable, if it
were sufficiently fascinating -- but of any perspective whatever.

In his book, every leader or unblinking supporter of the C.I.A. is wonderful.
William Casey was ''the toughest, smartest, most complex and most enigmatic''
director Rizzo worked for. Leon Panetta was ''the most instantly likable C.I.A.
director I had ever met.'' George Tenet ''was the most 'regular guy' D.C.I. I
ever worked for. . . . It was impossible not to like him.'' John Deutch was ''a
sympathetic, fascinating figure, . . . caring, witty and unpretentious.'' Even
''starchy, self-righteous'' Stansfield Turner, who slashed the agency's work
force, is ultimately appraised as ''an impressive and admirable man in many
respects.''

When these fellow insiders make serious mistakes, their motives are deemed pure.
Porter Goss neglected to tell the congressional intelligence committees that
videotapes of C.I.A. torture had been destroyed -- but, Rizzo writes, ''I remain
convinced that he never intended to hide the information from Congress or
otherwise cover up the destruction.'' Jose Rodriguez, the deputy director for
operations, destroyed the tapes on his own, ignoring orders from the White
House, the C.I.A. director and Rizzo himself -- but Rizzo is ''convinced'' that
he did it not to cover up crimes but ''because he realized, after three years of
relentless pleas, that he was never going to get the go-ahead to destroy the
tapes.''

The agency's critics receive no such indulgences. Ron Wyden of the Senate
Intelligence Committee is simply ''a foe who could not be appeased.'' Senator
John McCain -- who reacted to a briefing about the C.I.A.'s ''enhanced
interrogation techniques'' by muttering, ''It's all torture'' -- gave Rizzo
''serious pause about his temperament.'' (Rizzo twists the knife by noting,
twice, that he voted for Barack Obama in the 2008 election.)

But to Rizzo, ''being ignored is even worse than being mistrusted,'' and the
biggest sinner in this circle of hell is Bill Clinton, who, he writes, ''gave
the agency the most hurtful presidential snub I witnessed in my entire career.''
Specifically, he didn't attend a memorial service for a group of slain C.I.A.
officers but sent ''his wife'' instead. Clinton's no-show was clearly impolitic,
but it's a bit much for Rizzo to call it ''an unforgivable slight,'' especially
since he notes it occurred less than a week after Clinton's inauguration.

The incident colors Rizzo's view of Clinton's entire presidency. He acknowledges
that Clinton signed intelligence findings authorizing the killing of Osama bin
Laden, but dismisses them as ''woefully insufficient'' and ''honeycombed with
conditions and caveats'' -- ignoring Clinton's cruise missile strikes on bin
Laden's training camp in August 1998. (Granted, bin Laden had left the premises,
but there's nothing honeycombed about a swarm of cruise missiles.)

By contrast, he waves away President Bush's early failure to sign a new
intelligence finding on bin Laden as ''totally understandable.'' As for the 9/11
attack, Rizzo writes, ''no one had envisioned this particular nightmare
scenario.'' Tellingly, he writes nothing about Bush's failure to act on George
Tenet's now-famous warnings, throughout the summer of 2001, about an impending
Qaeda attack on American soil. (Rizzo mentions the warnings but not Bush's
neglect.)

Bush is excused all round. Recalling that Bush once publicly denied that the
United States had sent detainees to countries whose governments engaged in
torture, Rizzo writes, ''What the president said was false.'' However, he goes
on, ''It's not that he deliberately lied -- I am sure that he did not. Still,
his answer wasn't true.'' In another astonishing passage, Rizzo asserts that
Bush didn't know about the enhanced interrogation techniques despite claiming in
his own book that he had personally approved them. ''Now that's a stand-up
guy,'' Rizzo toasts.

There are some interesting bits in ''Company Man,'' especially Rizzo's
description of a National Security Council meeting where Bush's cabinet
discussed the various interrogation methods used on Qaeda detainees. Colin
Powell was most bothered by sleep deprivation, Condoleezza Rice by forced
nudity. Rizzo recalls nobody in the room getting worked up about waterboarding.

Rizzo also tells a gripping story, worthy of a scene in a spy movie, about
Aldrich Ames, the Soviet mole inside the agency. And he has a few
eyebrow-raising one-Â­liners: William Casey once invited Ralph Nader for a talk
(about what, he doesn't say); the C.I.A. gets intelligence from several people
in Hollywood (though its value isn't clear). One yearns for more such tidbits,
and more about them.

Rizzo also shies away from substance on many policy matters. While discussing
waterboarding, he writes, ''There was another technique so gruesome that the
Justice Department later stopped short of approving it.'' Or: ''In 1993, I spent
months as the C.I.A.'s focal point on a high-level intergovernmental task force
convened in the wake of the first'' attack on the World Trade Center. Probably
the agency's manuscript-reviewer deleted the details, but without them, such
lines are mere flirtation.

Occasionally, he'll share an insight. ''Every one of the seven presidents I
served came to turn to and depend on the C.I.A.,'' he writes, because it was a
''unique asset -- it can move quickly . . . in secret,'' and it has ''no other
client,'' it's ''a president's personal pop stand. . . . None of them is going
to give that up.'' This helps explain, among other things, President Obama's
accession to intelligence operations (C.I.A. drone strikes, N.S.A. surveillance)
that Senator Obama or Professor Obama would probably have protested.

But ''Company Man'' falls short because Rizzo is so enamored with the agency,
and so defensive about its critics, that he seems unaware of his own blind
spots. He begins and ends the book with the controversy over enhanced
interrogations; the subject wends its way through much of his narrative. At one
point, he acknowledges a former F.B.I. interrogator's claim that the techniques
had no effect on their subjects. However, Rizzo is ''convinced'' it was ''the
necessary and right thing to do'' for one reason: ''Every, and I mean every,
career C.I.A. employee who was involved in it believed in it wholeheartedly and
unswervingly.'' That, he writes, was ''the most decisive factor for me.''
Period. End of debate.

That may be enough for Rizzo, but not for us outside citizens, even those
grappling with the practice's consequences and dilemmas. His chief failing here
is that he took part in so much but tells us so little.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/05/books/review/john-rizzos-company-man.html

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY HEADS OF STATE)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


