                             1123 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On Tuesday

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 708 words


9 P.M. (Esquire) FRIDAY NIGHT TYKES There's no quitting in football. But there's
plenty of blood, sweat and tears when you're a baby linebacker exhausted in
99-degree heat, and the coach orders you to bear-crawl across the field. ''I
don't care how much pain you're in!'' Charles Chavarria, a former Marine,
bellows at his team, the Junior Broncos. ''You don't quit!'' This new reality
show follows five San Antonio teams of 8- and 9-year-olds as they try to pass,
run and tackle their way to the top of the Texas Youth Football Association,
where ranting coaches, obsessive parents and helmet-to-helmet hits are de
rigueur. ''Sometimes, parents say I may be crossing a little bit of a line,''
Mr. Chavarria says. ''They need to toughen up. If you don't push your kids,
you're accepting failure.''

9:50 AM. (MoreMax) LOLA VERSUS (2012) After Lola (Greta Gerwig), a graduate
student in New York, is dumped by her fianc√©, Luke (Joel Kinnaman), as her 30th
birthday approaches, she tries to pull her life together with the help of the
wacky Alice (Zoe Lister-Jones) and the sensitive Henry (Hamish Linklater). But
Luke can't let go of Lola entirely, and she can't help longing to reunite with
him. Debra Winger and Bill Pullman play Lola's mostly supportive parents. The
film, directed by Daryl Wein from a script he wrote with Ms. Lister-Jones,
''very much wants to be a funny, affectionate portrait of a young woman in
crisis,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times, but, ''unfortunately, is a
dismayingly conventional exploration of the vicissitudes of romance.'' Lola, he
added, ''deserves better.''

12:30 P.M. (Sundance) TRANSAMERICA (2005) Felicity Huffman plays Bree, a
preoperative transsexual who, though still technically a man, passes for a woman
with tasteful pink outfits, meticulous makeup and a breathy voice. But before
gender reassignment surgery, Bree must tie up a loose end, and is soon on the
road with a previously unknown son (Kevin Zegers) she fathered when she was
male. This debut feature by Duncan Tucker ''sets out to affirm Bree's dignity,
to liberate her and others like her from any association with camp or
freakishness,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. ''That the film succeeds without
slipping too far into sentimentality or didacticism is in no small measure the
result of Ms. Huffman's wit and grace. (She may also be the first film actor of
either sex to do frontal nudity, in a single movie, as both.)''

8 P.M. (Fox) DADS After Warner (Giovanni Ribisi) sends an ailing Veronica
(Brenda Song) home, Eli (Seth Green) cares for her in the hope that she'll want
to sleep with him. In ''Brooklyn Nine-Nine,'' at 8:30, the bet between Jake
(Andy Samberg, who won a Golden Globe for the role on Sunday) and Amy (Melissa
Fumero) about who can make more arrests comes to an end. In ''New Girl,'' at 9,
Jess (Zooey Deschanel) and Nick (Jake Johnson) compete for the attention of
Coach (Damon Wayans Jr.). And in ''The Mindy Project,'' at 9:30, Jeremy (Ed
Weeks) sends Mindy (Mindy Kaling), Danny (Chris Messina), Peter (Adam Pally) and
Morgan (Ike Barinholtz) to Los Angeles to receive certification for cosmetic
injectibles.

8 P.M. (CBS) NCIS Gibbs (Mark Harmon) and his team use evidence from a drone
attack to track a terrorist. In ''NCIS: Los Angeles,'' at 9, the murder of a
federal agent forces Blye (Daniela Ruah) and Granger (Miguel Ferrer) to
investigate hawala, an ancient system of money transfer, in Afghanistan.

1:30 A.M. (TCM) CARNAL KNOWLEDGE (1971) Jack Nicholson and Art Garfunkel play
old college friends coping with the sexual revolution in this comedy, directed
by Mike Nichols from a screenplay by Jules Feiffer. Candice Bergen, Ann-Margret
and Cynthia O'Neil play the women in their lives. '' 'Carnal Knowledge'
represents a nearly ideal collaboration of directorial and writing talents,''
Bosley Crowther wrote in The Times, noting that ''the performances are almost
spectacularly right.'' He added, ''By limiting their vision to a single aspect
of human experience (I suppose you could also call it human endeavor), Nichols
and Feiffer have made a movie that is not only very funny, but in a casual way
-- in the way of something observed in a half-light -- more profound than much
more ambitious films.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/14/arts/television/whats-on-tuesday.html

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY WALTER IOOSS/ESQUIRE NETWORK
 JESSICA MIGLIO/WEINSTEIN COMPANY)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


