                             1194 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 7, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

To Revive His Prospects, Rubio Pushes U.S. Strength

BYLINE: By JONATHAN MARTIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1195 words


OXON HILL, Md. -- Alarmed by the rise of noninterventionist voices in his party,
Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, is aiming to revive his political
prospects in an unlikely way: trying to become the leading voice for a muscular
brand of foreign policy.

The road to presidential success in Iowa and New Hampshire may not run through
the Crimean Peninsula or the streets of Caracas, but in recent weeks Mr. Rubio
has used Russia's incursion into Ukraine and the violent clashes in Venezuela to
remind Republicans of their orthodoxy -- projecting strength abroad -- and of
why he was such a favorite in the party before seeing his popularity slip over
his backing of an immigration overhaul.

The party has been pulled by competing forces before -- such as when Pat
Buchanan's more isolationist leanings contrasted with the internationalist views
of the first President George Bush in 1992 -- but the ascent of the Tea Party
and its skepticism about foreign entanglements is now framing an even larger
internal debate.

Addressing a gathering of conservatives here on Thursday, Mr. Rubio, a potential
2016 presidential candidate, sought to link the right's resolute belief in
American exceptionalism with a call for the United States to play a more robust
role in confronting bad actors on the world stage.

That posture stands in contrast with other members of his party, notably Senator
Rand Paul of Kentucky, who argues that the United States should be wary of
foreign intervention and retreat from the policies of the George W. Bush era.
The divergent national security views of the two ambitious, first-term senators
offer an early preview of a debate sure to play out in the Republican
presidential primary in 2016.

''There is only one nation on earth capable of rallying and bringing together
the free people on this planet to stand up to the spread of totalitarianism,''
Mr. Rubio told attendees of the Conservative Political Action Conference,
offering a tour d'horizon of affairs in China, North Korea, Iran, Venezuela and
Russia.

After suffering a bruising from conservatives over immigration, Mr. Rubio, who
devoted over half of his 16-minute address to national security issues, has been
delivering the same message of late in formal speeches to conservative think
tanks, in Twitter messages, op-ed pieces, television appearances, on the Senate
floor and in private conversations with leaders on trips to Britain, South Korea
and Japan.

He is not only trying to rehabilitate his image among those conservatives who
believe that he was advocating for amnesty for illegal immigrants, he also is
seizing an opening to put a potential presidential rival who has enjoyed far
better reviews recently on the defensive.

For a while, Mr. Paul's views on national security, such as his opposition to
the use of drones and the National Security Agency surveillance program,
dovetailed with the deep conservative unease toward empowering President Obama.
But Ukraine offers a moment for hawks like Mr. Rubio to reassert themselves.

In an interview, Mr. Rubio did not mention Mr. Paul by name, but the Floridian
plainly wants to begin drawing differences between his more hawkish approach to
foreign policy and Mr. Paul's preference for restraint abroad. ''There are
forces within our party, there have always been in American politics, that
basically say, 'Who cares what happens everywhere else? Just mind our own
business,' '' Mr. Rubio said, warning that there are ''consequences and
repercussions'' to such an outlook.

Doug Stafford, a top adviser to Mr. Paul, said the senator from Kentucky
''rejects the label of isolationism.''

''He believes in a strong national defense, and an America that leads the way in
the world and engages with other nations,'' Mr. Stafford said. ''For too long
there has been a false debate between those who wish to be everywhere all the
time, and nowhere.''

Mr. Rubio's supporters and other Republican hawks believe that Republicans'
calling for a more aggressive response in Ukraine reveals that Mr. Paul is out
of step with his own party.

''Rand Paul has been the outlier on this,'' said William Kristol, the editor of
The Weekly Standard, a conservative magazine. ''There has not been much of a
market among Republicans for America to unapologetically stand aside as Russia
invades Ukraine.'' He pointed to a third Republican senator, Ted Cruz of Texas,
as an indicator of the shifting center of political gravity among Republicans on
foreign policy.

After speaking to CPAC on Thursday, Mr. Cruz strode across the street to address
a conference of national security hawks and assured them he was not aligned with
Mr. Paul on foreign policy. ''You can point to two points on the spectrum where
Republicans lie,'' Mr. Cruz said of the party's foreign policy poles. ''On one
side you have the views of John McCain. The other end of the spectrum, you have
the views of Rand Paul. Now, with respect, my views are very much the views of
Ronald Reagan, which I would suggest is a third point on the triangle.''

Mr. Paul himself also has recently calibrated his views on the matter in light
of Russia's actions and the Republican response.

Last week, he lamented that some Republicans had an outdated view of Moscow.
''Some on our side are so stuck in the Cold War era that they want to tweak
Russia all the time, and I don't think that is a good idea,'' Mr. Paul told The
Washington Post.

By Friday, when it became apparent that Russia had moved troops into Crimea and
his party was nearly unanimous in its outrage about the incursion, Mr. Paul
sounded a different note. ''We live in an interconnected world, and the United
States has a vital role in the stability of that world,'' Mr. Paul said in a
statement, adding that America ''should make it abundantly clear to Russia''
that it expects Ukraine's sovereignty to be respected.

If Mr. Paul has to modulate when the natural Republican preference for strength
on foreign policy re-emerges, Mr. Rubio and his fellow interventionists must be
mindful that the country's war weariness after more than a decade of conflict is
hardly limited to just doves.

A New York Times/CBS poll taken last month revealed that only 34 percent of
Republicans said the United States should take the leading role among all
countries in trying to solve international conflicts -- down from 58 percent
when the same question was asked soon after the start of the Iraq war in the
spring of 2003. Mr. Rubio seemed to acknowledge this reluctance in his CPAC
speech, assuring conservatives that he did not want America ''to be involved in
15 wars'' and conceding that the country could not resolve every conflict around
the globe.

Still, after a period in which his rapid ascent in Republican politics seemed
stymied, he is again receiving plaudits on the right, including from some who
criticized his immigration position. In addition to his stance on Ukraine, his
late-February Senate speech lambasting Nicol√°s Maduro's government in Venezuela
is positioning him well, conservatives say.

''As long as he stays away from immigration he'll be a force in 2016,'' said
Conn Carroll, managing editor of Townhall, a conservative magazine.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/07/us/politics/trying-to-revive-his-prospects-rub
io-pushes-strength-abroad.html

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: SENATOR MARCO RUBIO of Florida spoke Thursday to the
Conservative Political Action Conference in Oxon Hill, Md.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE of New Jersey used his speech on Thursday to return to the
national stage amid a bruising scandal.
 SENATOR MITCH McCONNELL of Kentucky arrived on stage at the  conservative
conference on Thursday holding a rifle. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DREW ANGERER FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


