                             1130 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iranian Diplomat Is Killed in Yemen

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 390 words


SANA, Yemen -- Gunmen killed an Iranian diplomat in a drive-by shooting here on
Saturday, security and medical officials said, in the latest attack on Iran's
diplomatic corps in the Middle East in recent months.

Iranian state television said that Ali Asghar Asadi, Iran's economic attach√© in
Sana, the Yemeni capital, was attacked while driving and suffered four gunshot
wounds to the chest and stomach. It did not elaborate, but said Mr. Asadi was
''martyred.''

Three Yemeni security officials said that Mr. Asadi was leaving the Iranian
ambassador's house in the Hadda neighborhood in southern Sana when assailants
opened fire, and that he died in a hospital. A medical official confirmed the
death.

Another Yemeni security official said Mr. Asadi suffered three gunshot wounds to
the chest and shoulder. The two accounts of the shooting could not be
immediately reconciled, though conflicting information is common after such
attacks.

The official said the initial investigation suggested that the gunmen had first
tried to kidnap Mr. Asadi by stopping his car. When he resisted, the official
said, the assailants shot him and fled the area, a busy commercial district.

All officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they are not authorized to
talk to journalists.

Relations between Iran and Yemen have soured over what the Yemeni government
says is Iranian meddling in its domestic affairs. But Yemen's foreign minister,
Abu Bakr al-Qirbi, quickly condemned the attack, calling it a ''terrorist
criminal act'' that targeted bilateral relations. He said the two countries
wanted to avoid any attempts to harm relations.

''This operation has targeted the Yemeni-Iranian relations before it targeted
the diplomat,'' Mr. Qirbi told the state news agency SANA. He said the
authorities would pursue the culprits and bring them to justice.

Another Iranian diplomat in Yemen was abducted by gunmen in July and remains in
captivity. Officials suspect that Al Qaeda militants are behind that kidnapping.
Negotiations to secure the diplomat's release have so far failed.

The Yemen branch of Al Qaeda is the world's most active, using political turmoil
in the impoverished Gulf country to strengthen its presence there. The
government has been battling the militants with assistance from the United
States, which has attacked them with drone strikes.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/19/world/middleeast/iran-diplomat-dies-in-yemen-a
fter-shooting.html

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


