                             1189 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 5, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Announces 12.2% Increase in Its Military Budget for 2014

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1122 words


BEIJING -- China announced on Wednesday that it would increase its military
budget for 2014 to almost $132 billion, a 12.2 percent rise over last year. The
rapid growth in defense spending is another sign of the country's goal of
becoming a dominant military presence in the Pacific, with a navy able to
project power across the region.

The rate of growth in spending is greater than that of recent years. In 2013,
China's defense budget increased by 10.7 percent over the previous year. The
country's military spending is the second largest in the world, behind that of
the United States.

The buildup of the People's Liberation Army, which also includes navy and air
force branches, is considered by many analysts to be consistent with the size of
China's economy -- the second largest in the world -- and its global political
influence. Nevertheless, the military expansion is being closely watched by
other nations in the region and by the United States, the supreme military power
in the Pacific.

American officials have expressed growing concerns over diplomatic tensions in
East Asia and Southeast Asia, much of it related to regional anxieties over
China's military rise and its assertion of sovereignty over rocks, reefs,
islands, fisheries and sea lanes in the area. The United States has said it does
not take sides in the territorial disputes, but it asserts it will maintain
freedom of navigation.

Foreign military analysts say China's actual annual military spending is higher
than the official figure. IHS Jane's, a defense industry consulting and analysis
company, estimated that China would spend $148 billion this year, but such
estimates can vary widely. The unofficial estimate is still much less than the
military budget of the United States, which is officially $526.8 billion for
fiscal year 2014.

Dennis J. Blasko, a former military attach√© at the American Embassy in Beijing
and a retired Army officer, said the 2014 Chinese military budget ''won't break
the bank, but it says to the troops, 'Thank you for your service, you are
important to us, we support you.'''

''A significant portion likely will be used for more pay raises,'' he added.
''You may recall hearing some talk about how P.L.A. officers should be paid more
than civil servants.''

A major portion of the increase will go to ''better, more realistic training,''
Mr. Blasko added. ''The navy will also continue to train more at greater
distances from China, which is more expensive than training in local waters.''

China announced the 2014 military budget on the first day of the National
People's Congress, an annual meeting of a legislature whose purpose is to
formally approve policy already made by Communist Party leaders.

''We will comprehensively enhance the revolutionary nature of the Chinese armed
forces, further modernize them and upgrade their performance, and continue to
raise their deterrence and combat capabilities in the information age,'' Prime
Minister Li Keqiang said at the opening session on Wednesday.

Other Asian nations suspect China's priority is building offensive capabilities
and point to China's increasingly assertive postures on sovereignty issues.
Southeast Asian nations have opposed China's territorial claims in the South
China Sea, which some analysts say has rich oil and gas reserves and abundant
fisheries.

Last November, China stunned Japan, South Korea and the United States when it
announced a new Air Defense Identification Zone over a swath of the East China
Sea, saying that foreign planes, military or civilian, would have to report
flight paths through the zone to China. The United States has continued to send
military flights through the zone without obeying China's request.

China and Japan have been engaged in a heated diplomatic dispute over the
sovereignty of islands administered by Japan in the East China Sea. Military
patrols and movements by fishing vessels around those islands, called the
Senkaku in Japanese and the Diaoyu in Chinese, could unintentionally trigger a
conflict, American officials say.

''The last thing we need is some unintended incident that leads to unintended
consequences, very severe consequences, whether it's a fishing boat bumping into
a navy vessel and someone drowning,'' Gary F. Locke, the departing American
ambassador to China, said at his final news conference in Beijing last week.
''So it's important that both sides lower the temperature and focus on
diplomacy.''

American military officials have said ties with their Chinese counterparts are
much weaker than with Soviet military officials during the height of the Cold
War. In late February, Gen. Raymond T. Odierno, the United States Army chief of
staff, visited China to lay the groundwork for starting a formal dialogue and
exchange program between the United States Army and the People's Liberation
Army. The general said he expected the first meeting in that program to take
place before the end of 2014.

In recent years, the Chinese military has deployed to sea an aircraft carrier it
refitted after being purchased from Ukraine, the Liaoning, and tested at least
two stealth fighters. Many Chinese defense companies and research programs at
state-run universities have been developing a range of drones for use by the
People's Liberation Army and for sale to other nations.

Mr. Li, the prime minister, also said Wednesday that China's economic growth
rate for 2014 is expected to be 7.5 percent, which is consistent with
projections by many analysts. The target for the consumer price index, a measure
of inflation, is 3.5 percent.

Unlike in recent years, the Finance Ministry on Wednesday did not release
revenue and expenditure budgets of local governments, saying in a report that
''related data is still being collected.'' The lack of data made it impossible
to tally the total domestic security budget for 2014. The ministry said the
budget from the central government for public security was $33 billion, but most
of the financing of the huge domestic security apparatus is in the budget of
local governments. In 2011, the announced total amount was 624.4 billion
renminbi, or $95 billion, the first time the planned budget for the domestic
security apparatus, led by Zhou Yongkang at the time, had exceeded the official
military budget.

That trend has continued each year, and in 2013 the announced amount was 769
billion renminbi, an 8.7 percent increase over the previous year. The knife
murders of 29 civilians last weekend in the Kunming train station, which
appeared to be an act of domestic terrorism with roots in ethnic conflict, will
no doubt contribute to calls for even greater increases in security spending.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/06/world/asia/china-military-budget.html

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


