                             119 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                            August 19, 2014 Tuesday

China Said to Deploy Drones After Unrest in Xinjiang

BYLINE: DIDI KIRSTEN TATLOW

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 572 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â State media say drones have been used in Xinjiang against
&#8220;terrorists,&#8221; a move an overseas Uighur advocacy group said
represented a further militarization of a region beset by ethnic violence.


Three days after an eruption of violence in the western Chinese region of
Xinjiang left nearly 100 people dead, the region's "antiterrorist command" asked
the country's biggest space and defense contractor for help. It wanted technical
experts to operate drones the authorities in Xinjiang had ordered last year in
anticipation of growing unrest. The target was "terrorists," according to the
online edition of People's Daily, a Communist Party media outlet.

On Monday, the Uyghur American Association, a Washington-based advocacy group
for Uighurs, the mostly Muslim ethnic group native to Xinjiang, said the use of
drones pointed to the further militarization of the region and warned that the
drones could be deployed against people as well as for surveillance and
intelligence-gathering mentioned by Chinese media.

According to a report in People's Daily this week, the China Aerospace Science
and Technology Corporation, the main contractor for the Chinese space program,
responded swiftly to the July 31 request by the Xinjiang authorities.

On Aug. 1, the company sent a technical team to Yarkand County, in Kashgar
Prefecture, where state media reported that on July 28 security forces had shot
and killed 59 people described as terrorists and about three dozen others
described as civilians.

Xinjiang has seen growing ethnic and religious tensions in recent years between
Uighurs and the Han, China's dominant ethnic group, with hundreds, perhaps
thousands, killed.

The technical team departed from Beijing, driving through the night and arriving
in Yarkand at 3 a.m. on Aug. 2, People's Daily reported.

There, the drones were deployed on multiple missions round the clock, operated
by special forces in Yarkand but under the supervision of the space company
team, state media reported, providing "important intelligence in tracking down
and arresting terrorists," Legal Daily reported, without elaborating.

The Uyghur American Association has called for international attention to the
use of drones.

"The domestic use of unmanned aerial vehicles is an extremely serious and
disturbing development and U.A.A. believes the use of drones in East Turkestan
will only intensify tensions in the region," it said in a statement, using its
name for the region known in Chinese as Xinjiang, or "new border."

"The use of drones over villages in East Turkestan shows that China treats all
Uyghurs as state enemies," said the group's president, Alim Seytoff, in the
statement. "China is not singling out alleged 'terrorists'; it is intimidating
entire communities, including the very people its purported antiterror campaign
is supposed to protect."

The association said the violence broke out after local residents protested
against a heavy-handed crackdown during the recently concluded Ramadan fasting
period and against "the extrajudicial use of lethal force in recent weeks in the
county," citing local sources.

The drones were ordered last year by the Xinjiang regional government, and
delivered earlier this year, People's Daily said.

Drones are being used increasingly in China, the state-run newspaper Global
Times has reported, and the country manufactures and exports its own.

Drones have been used to locate earthquake victims, and once, Global Times
reported, to hunt for an emu that escaped from a national park in Linfen, Shanxi
Province, where Chinese yew trees are cultivated. It wasn't clear if the emu was
found.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


