                             1185 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 4, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Unlikely Allies Push for a Liberalization of Sentencing Laws

BYLINE: By MATT APUZZO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1154 words


WASHINGTON -- Shortly after Senator Rand Paul filed suit last month against the
Obama administration to stop its electronic dragnet of American phone records,
he sat down for lunch with Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. in his private
dining room at the Justice Department.

Mr. Paul, a Kentucky Republican, is one of the Obama administration's most vocal
critics. But their discussion focused on an issue on which they have found
common cause: eliminating mandatory minimum sentences for nonviolent drug
offenders.

The two men are unlikely allies. Their partnership unites the nation's first
African-American attorney general, who sees his legacy in a renewed focus on
civil rights, and some of Congress's most prominent libertarians, who have
accused the Obama administration of trampling on personal freedom with drones,
wiretaps, tracking devices and too much government.

While a range of judges, prosecutors and public defenders have for years raised
concerns about disparities in punishment, it is this alliance that may make
politically possible the most significant liberalization of sentencing laws
since President Richard M. Nixon declared war on drugs.

In 2010, Congress unanimously voted to reduce the 100-to-1 disparity between
sentences for crack cocaine offenses and those for powdered cocaine, a vestige
of the crack epidemic. Now, the Obama administration and its allies in Congress
are pushing to go even further. Mr. Holder wants to make prisoners eligible for
early release if they were sentenced under the now-abolished crack guidelines.
And he wants judges to have more discretion when sentencing nonviolent drug
offenders.

For Mr. Holder, addressing sentencing laws is central to a second-term agenda
that also includes defending voting rights and same-sex marriage. Black
Americans have disproportionately received lengthy prison terms and are
extremely overrepresented in the inmate population.

Libertarian-minded Republicans see long prison sentences as an ineffective and
expensive way to address crime.

''This is the definition of how you get bipartisan agreement,'' Mr. Paul said in
an interview. ''It's not splitting the difference. It's finding areas of common
interest.''

Mr. Paul is backing a sentencing overhaul bill, also supported by Mr. Holder and
the Obama administration, that he predicts will pass the Senate with support
from up to half of its Republicans. The bill's sponsors include Democratic
stalwarts such as Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois and Senator Patrick J.
Leahy of Vermont, the Judiciary Committee chairman, as well as Republicans with
strong Tea Party credentials like Senator Mike Lee of Utah and Senator Ted Cruz
of Texas

Similar legislation is pending in the House, where libertarians and Tea Party
conservatives will be crucial to determining its fate if it comes up for a vote.
That is the same group that bucked the Obama administration and nearly succeeded
in passing legislation prohibiting the National Security Agency from seizing the
phone records of millions of Americans.

Some Republicans say that they are the ones being consistent on matters of
protecting liberties, and that Mr. Holder's push for changes to the sentencing
laws is a step in their direction, not the other way around.

''I would say Eric Holder supports me and my civil liberties bill,'' said one of
the House bill's sponsors, Representative Ra√∫l R. Labrador, an Idaho Republican
who once demanded Mr. Holder's resignation over the botched gun-trafficking case
called Operation Fast and Furious.

Republicans have historically been proponents of crime legislation, but low
crime rates have given proponents of a sentencing overhaul an opening.

''It makes it much less likely that people are going to be attacked as soft on
crime,'' Mr. Holder said in an interview last week, ''which is why we very
consciously styled our efforts as being smart on crime.''

Mr. Holder noted that a third of the Justice Department's budget is spent
running prisons. That resonates with fiscal conservatives like Representative
Jason Chaffetz, Republican of Utah.

Mr. Chaffetz once suggested that Republicans might have Mr. Holder arrested for
contempt. But Mr. Holder recently had him for breakfast at the Justice
Department.

''I understand what hearings are like,'' Mr. Holder said. ''They're as much
theater as they are substance. The conversation we had over that breakfast was
really about substance. When it comes to substance, there's a basis for
agreement between a Democratic attorney general and these Republican
congressmen.''

Mr. Chaffetz said his conversations with Mr. Holder represented ''one of the few
instances I can point to where we're starting to make some kid steps forward''
toward bipartisan collaboration.

That is not to say Mr. Chaffetz -- or Mr. Paul -- sees many areas for agreement
with the administration on civil liberties issues. For instance, Mr. Chaffetz
said he had failed repeatedly to get the Justice Department to make public its
policies for tracking vehicles without warrants.

''I think there's a realization that we're not actually solving the problem with
some of these drug crimes,'' Mr. Chaffetz added. ''But on the other side of the
coin, there's no trust with the Obama administration. None.''

Mr. Holder said he was committed to protecting civil liberties and believed
that, when complete, the administration's review of N.S.A. programs may
alleviate some of the privacy concerns among civil libertarians.

''You can't, it seems to me, say you're strong on civil rights if you're not
being equally strong on protecting civil liberties,'' he said.

Representative Trey Gowdy, a South Carolina Republican and a former federal
prosecutor, joined Mr. Chaffetz for breakfast at the Justice Department and
described Mr. Holder as a gracious host. ''The fact that he's taking the time to
talk to two backbenchers, he certainly didn't have to do that,'' Mr. Gowdy said.

Mr. Gowdy said he was convinced that mandatory sentences made little sense for
minor offenses. But he doubts that a sentencing bill can pass the House, in part
because voters in Republican districts oppose so many of the Obama
administration's policies. Mr. Holder's push for same-sex marriage does not make
it easier, he said.

Mr. Paul was more optimistic. He said conservatives and liberals would join in
support of changing sentencing laws, just as they have joined in opposition of
the N.S.A.'s domestic surveillance programs.

Mr. Paul and Mr. Holder talked about their mutual support for a bill in the
Kentucky Legislature that would restore voting rights for felons. And Mr. Paul
agreed that there was a civil rights component to changing the sentencing laws.

''Well-intentioned things can go overboard,'' he said. ''I don't think it was
intended to have a racial outcome, but it did.''

As the meeting concluded, they agreed to work together and said their goodbyes.
Then Mr. Paul wryly added, ''I'll see you in court.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/04/us/politics/holder-and-republicans-unite-to-so
ften-sentencing-laws.html

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., left, and Senator Rand
Paul in Washington last month. Mr. Holder's second-term agenda includes
addressing sentencing laws. Mr. Paul and like-minded libertarians see long
prison sentences as ineffective and expensive. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEPHEN
CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


