                             1186 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 4, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Albums From Real Estate, Linda Perhacs and Nick Waterhouse

BYLINE: By JON CARAMANICA, JON PARELES and BEN RATLIFF

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; NEW MUSIC; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1165 words


REAL ESTATE

''Atlas'' (Domino)

Nobody wake up Martin Courtney. For five or so years, he's been ambling through
life as the frontman of Real Estate, a man at peace with his bliss and
uninterested in finding a way out.

The calm, earthy and delicate ''Atlas,'' the third Real Estate album, is less
ambitious than its second album, ''Days,'' and somehow more heroic. ''Days'' was
an argument for structure, a reminder of the sanctity of paved road from a band
often accused of wandering.

But the walkabout returns on ''Atlas,'' an album of modern indie-rock lullabies
on which slowness is its own reward. This band -- originally from Ridgewood,
N.J., and now mostly a Brooklyn concern -- has elevated lethargy into a kind of
poetry. Its guitars, by Mr. Courtney and Matt Mondanile, are forever plangent,
and Alex Bleeker, on bass, provides unobtrusive propulsion. (The core band is
rounded out here with the keyboardist Matt Kallman and the drummer Jackson
Pollis.)

Real Estate has some things in common with fellow New Jerseyans Yo La Tengo,
mostly in mood. But this band is about reduction, not density: It aims for
maximum impact for the minimum input. Mr. Courtney's lyrics are about emptiness
and regret and the inability to neatly reclaim the past as it once was. That
said, he rarely sounds too upset about it. (Mr. Bleeker sings one song here,
''How Might I Live,'' one of the album's darkest moments, both because of the
sense of purpose in his voice -- relatively speaking, that is -- and the
slightly sinister lyrics.)

Give Real Estate credit for deriving meaning from shimmering beauty, for seeing
the poignancy in the ever-present sunlight. There is no narrative arc here, no
sense of beginning and ending, no resolution. As Mr. Courtney sings at the end
of ''Had to Hear'':

I don't need the horizon

to tell me where the sky ends

it's a subtle landscape

where I come from

JON CARAMANICA

LINDA PERHACS

''The Soul of All Natural Things'' (Asthmatic Kitty)

It has been 44 years between albums for the singer and songwriter Linda Perhacs.
Her 1970 album, ''Parallelograms'' (Kapp), which was barely noticed when it was
released, became a touchstone for the freak-folk movement. On her second album,
''The Soul of All Natural Things,'' her aura of mystical innocence is remarkably
intact. ''As I awoke I heard multiple tones/a resonant hum made of layers of
drones,'' she sings in ''Song of the Planets.''

At the end of the 1960s, Ms. Perhacs was a dental hygienist who lived in the Los
Angeles hippie enclave of Topanga Canyon and dabbled in songwriting. One of her
patients, the film composer Leonard Rosenman, discovered her and shepherded her
through recording sessions with top-tier musicians and an experimental streak.
Her high, gentle voice, sometimes multitracked into ghostly choirs, floated amid
meditative guitars and undercurrents of jazz and exotic percussion;
''Parallelograms'' itself was layered with electronic sounds. The album was a
sweetly psychedelic will-o'-the-wisp.

Ms. Perhacs had little interest in stardom or touring; she kept her day job all
these years. Prized by a handful of collectors and musicians, ''Parallelograms''
was reissued in 2005 and again in 2008. Daft Punk used one of her songs in its
2006 film, ''Daft Punk's Electroma,'' and Devendra Banhart got Ms. Perhacs to
sing on his 2007 album ''Smokey Rolls Down Thunder Canyon.''

When she was coaxed into performing at a tribute concert to ''Parallelograms,''
she realized how many younger musicians revered the album. With encouragement
from fans she has influenced, like the songwriter Julia Holter, she began
working on new songs, and she recorded them with the producers Fernando Perdomo
and Chris Price. They keep the music sounding largely organic without making the
album a slavish period piece.

Ms. Perhacs's voice is still clear and guileless, and her new songs still ponder
peace, love, nature and divinity. All of them swirl together in ''Intensity,''
which begins with one of her sustained, rippling vocal chorales and works its
way up, in gathering wavelets, toward something like funk and then melts back
into reflection. ''Prisms of Glass'' -- clearly a sequel to the geometrically
minded ''Parallelograms'' -- becomes a round of intertwined vocals, spiraling
into itself. ''The world is spinning, spinning, spinning like it's out of
control,'' she sings, like a lullaby, in ''When Things Are True Again.''

The album is brave in its fragility and sincerity; it's not for the cynical. But
it's not na√Øve, either. Ms. Perhacs's debut eventually found its following
because it mingled its hippie idealism with craft and innovation, and ''The Soul
of All Natural Things'' takes chances of its own. JON PARELES

NICK WATERHOUSE

''Holly'' (Innovative Leisure)

Nick Waterhouse is of his time and someone else's. He's 28, a meticulous white
Southern Californian, matured in the curatorial age and specializing in a
particular kind of American music. It's from long before his birth, but since he
plays it as if its story were still unfolding, let's write in present tense:
It's a dance-music kind of R&B, with horns and Cubanisms, a music with ears to
the Twist and boogaloo that hasn't yet forked toward Motown and rock 'n' roll.
If you could reduce him to a single source, it might be Little Willie John's
''Fever,'' from 1956, or a few other moody songs written by Otis Blackwell: ''My
Josephine,'' ''On That Power Line.''

There's lots of that around in general terms: sloppier bands from Los Angeles
and Brooklyn playing variations on surf and girl-group and garage-punk and R&B.
But Mr. Waterhouse is much more specific about sound and rhythm and gear and
visual aesthetics; he's also appealingly dry and tense in his lyrics. This is
not an either-or situation but a both-and. His work -- from the single ''Some
Place,'' in 2010, to his new album, ''Holly,'' his second -- has been slightly
insufferable and very good.

His singing, with tight vibrato shakes, remains guarded, flat, almost stoic, but
there's life in his guitar playing. He's got old licks internalized in his
hands, and you hear him fighting to only half-remember them, or to trip himself
into more intuitive gestures. Most of the time, this works: His solos, haloed
with reverb, are rhythmically tight, technically messy, dynamically crafty,
almost insightful. All their strangeness matters.

He surrounds himself with strong, if careful, arrangements: congas and shakers,
harmonizing backup singers, buzzing tenor saxophone solos, Cuban piano figures
on his version of Ty Segall's ''It No. 3.'' It's to his credit that on top of
such accuracy, his lyrics sound so weird, almost wrong, unfolding like redacted
dream-talk.

In ''Sleeping Pills,'' he really is recounting a dream: a vision of a woman
''grinning at me/at the bones in my fists.'' In ''Hands on the Clock,'' he might
as well be:

Just over, barely started

Concede

I can't bear the thought of

Well, that was quick, I thought

And watched

The lamp on the wall, the hands on the clock

BEN RATLIFF

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/04/arts/music/albums-from-real-estate-linda-perha
cs-and-nick-waterhouse.html

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


