                             1205 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 20, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Riding the Wave of 'Girls'

BYLINE: By ALEX WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section E; Column 0; Style Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1597 words


We definitely have to go dancing tonight. AndrewAndrew is D.J.ing at Greenhouse.
-- Elijah, to Hannah, ''Girls'' Episode 3, Season 2.

Ever since AndrewAndrew, a joined-at-the-hip downtown D.J. duo known for their
matching Palm Beach croquet party suits and Truman Capote glasses, scored a
cameo on Lena Dunham's hit HBO series last year, they have been wearing what
amounts to a ''Girls'' halo.

At gigs, this Tweedledum and Tweedledee for the fashion set were constantly
being approached by new fans requesting Icona Pop's ''I Love It,'' a song they
spun on the show, as if it were their anthem. Their brief, dialogue-free
appearance brought knowing nods on Fashionista, Refinery29 and Paper Magazine.
An idol of theirs, Carrie Brownstein from ''Portlandia,'' even buttonholed them
at a party to praise their work on the show, they said.

Gathered to watch the Oscars recently, their friends were openly scheming to
snag a cameo themselves. A dermatologist said she dreamed of earning a few
seconds of screen time playing herself, because ''it would be good for
business,'' but she also would be happy to just be a face in the background at a
bar. A writer mused on the product-placement potential of slipping a copy of her
memoir onto Hannah's night table.

''People were saying, 'So-and-so knows the casting person, so-and-so knows the
set decorator,' '' one of the Andrews (he declined to say which) recalled in a
telephone interview. ''Everybody there had a friend who had been on 'Girls.' ''

The '70s and '80s had Woody Allen movies and the concomitant socializing of its
cast members at Elaine's. The early aughts had ''The Sopranos,'' with bit
players suddenly prominently featured on tip sheets for Peggy Siegal movie
premieres. Now the credit roll of choice is on ''Girls,'' a show that seeks to
fortify its portrayal of Brooklyn bohemian-serf culture by drawing glorified
extras from the New York creative demimonde: artists, musicians, fashion
directors, plus the odd Greenpoint barista. (The show's third season finale is
Sunday).

These peripheral characters aren't cashing in like the show's stars. Ms. Dunham,
who plays Hannah, has brokered her ''Girls'' fame into a reported $3.7 million
book advance, a much-dissected Vogue cover and a turn hosting ''Saturday Night
Live''; Adam Driver has reportedly been in talks to play a heavy in the next
''Star Wars'' movie. And this being the age of social media, the status
conferred by such appearances is somewhat more nebulous than the automatic
lifting of a velvet rope: a GIF for one's Tumblr, perhaps. But for shaggy young
L-train drones looking to make their mark beyond Bushwick, a sprinkling of Lena
Dunham stardust can make them -- if ever so briefly -- micro-celebrities.

And for established cult figures on the New York scene (Jenna Lyons of J. Crew,
Kim Gordon of Sonic Youth), a few lines on ''Girls'' has solidified their
credibility as influencers. Ms. Lyons, J. Crew's president and creative
director, discovered this on a recent trip to the Brooklyn Museum to see the
Jean Paul Gaultier exhibition shortly after making her acting debut as Janice,
the steely GQ editor who is for a time Hannah's boss. As a fashion arbiter, Ms.
Lyons is no stranger to being approached by fans. But not like this. ''I was
standing in line and a guy came up and said, 'Can I take a picture with you?' ''
Ms. Lyons recalled. ''A friend of his said, 'Who's that?' and he said, 'Oh, she
was on 'Girls.' ''

For viewers, the show's heavy reliance on recognizable walk-ons has turned
''Girls'' cameo-spotting into a sport, one that allows them to bask in their New
York cultural literacy (''Hey, that's Ezra Koenig, from Vampire Weekend!''). To
identify the gaunt blonde in the rehab scene in Episode 1, Season 3, as Kim
Gordon, the alt-rock icon, is an intermediate feat. To tag the shaggy-haired guy
next to her is more of an expert accomplishment. ''Speaking of 'Girls,' that
indeed was club D.J., performance artist, actor, bon vivant and all-around good
guy Michael Cavadias in the rehab scenes,'' Steve Lewis wrote in BlackBook, the
downtown magazine, after the episode was shown in January. But of course.

Clearly, however, the show's creators are looking to achieve more than an
in-joke for the cool crowd. Familiar faces invest the show with a real-Brooklyn
verisimilitude, no small concern for a show that portrays a subculture obsessed
with ''authenticity.'' That is a point not lost on the familiar faces
themselves.

''If they're painting a picture of Brooklyn now, it would only help to have
people who are actually making and doing in Brooklyn,'' said Sean Bones, an
indie songwriter and producer from Carroll Gardens who got roped into forming a
noise-rock band for a warehouse party scene in Season 3 by a friend, Jody Lee
Lipes, who directed the episode.

There is ample precedent for these kinds of casting stunts. To underscore its
atmosphere of Upper East Side privilege, ''Gossip Girl'' frequently ladled from
New York's trough of society and fashion figures for cameos (Tinsley Mortimer,
Tory Burch, Diane von Furstenberg, among many others).

Before that, the practice was common on ''The Sopranos'' (which underscored its
tristate-area Italian-American feel by sprinkling in appearances by the likes of
Nancy Sinatra, or Frank Pellegrino, a real-life proprietor of Rao's, the East
Harlem Italian restaurant, who played an F.B.I. chief); ''Entourage'' (which
played up its behind-the-scenes Hollywood feel with cameos by Mark Wahlberg, Gus
Van Sant, Martin Scorsese and many others) and ''Sex and the City.''

Mr. Allen perhaps pioneered the strategy, bagging big-game nonactors from the
local celebrity ecosystem. Sometimes, they actually acted, like Paul Simon as
Tony Lacey, the cocaine-fueled music producer in ''Annie Hall,'' or Wallace
Shawn, the playwright and sometimes actor, as the ''little homunculus'' Jeremiah
in ''Manhattan.'' Often, they just popped up as themselves, like Marshall
McLuhan in ''Annie Hall,'' Bella Abzug in ''Manhattan'' and Saul Bellow and
Susan Sontag in ''Zelig'': a human form of set design.

''We started doing it quite a bit because it gave you a sense of New York -- it
was a period of street movies,'' recalled Juliet Taylor, Mr. Allen's longtime
casting director. ''If the part is tiny and there isn't a lot of acting
required, nobody can do it better than the real thing.''

But Ms. Dunham has taken the real-folks concept to new heights, mining not just
the city, but her family and friends. Her godfather, Jerry Saltz, the New York
magazine art critic, scored a brief speaking role as a theater producer this
season. ''I have one line on 'Girls' this season, it came about solely through
nepotism, and I could not be more proud,'' he recalled in his magazine's Vulture
blog.

Audrey Gelman, a close friend who managed communications for Scott Stringer's
city comptroller campaign, made multiple appearances on the show as ''Audrey,''
the new girlfriend of Marnie's ex, which helped her become an it-girl in both
the political pages and the fashion blogs. Rachel Antonoff, a young fashion
designer who happens to be a sister of Ms. Dunham's boyfriend, the musician Jack
Antonoff, popped up as ''Jessa's customer'' in a Season 2 episode (Ms. Dunham
also produced a droll short film called ''Best Friends'' for her 2013 fall
collection).

No wonder that, when a script in Season 2 called for a ''Ricky Van Veen type''
(Mr. Van Veen, a founder of CollegeHumor.com, is a reigning geek prince of
Silicon Alley), the show looked no further than Ricky Van Veen himself, who is
now the fianc√© of Allison Williams, who plays Marnie on the show. They even left
it to Mr. Van Veen, who since has been receiving residual checks for $14, to
come up with the authentically grating dot-com-speak that his character would
use to try to seduce Shoshanna at a party.

''Lena just said, 'Write down a bunch of stuff that an annoying Internet kid
would say,' '' Mr. Van Veen said. ''I went into a trailer with my iPhone and
wrote down a bunch of things I've heard that make me cringe, like 'I've been
wanting to get into the woods to connect to real life, because I'm so bogged
down with ones and zeros.' ''

Other downtown figures, however, achieve their own ''Girls'' micro-celebrity
without a direct link to Ms. Dunham.

Lord Gavin McLeod of Glenkairne (no relation to ''The Love Boat'' star) cut a
familiar figure around Greenpoint, Brooklyn, with his vintage Michelle Phillips
long hair, leather pants and fur coats. ''I was doing Jared Leto before he
was,'' he said. Then, last year, Mr. McLeod, a Scottish-born beauty consultant
and (he said) a son of a marquis, befriended Jenni Konner, the show's executive
producer, at a photo shoot. Soon after, casting called to anoint him ''Guy With
the Side Ponytail,'' with whom a drunken Hannah swaps her fruit-printed camisole
for a chartreuse string top during a sweaty dance-floor scene at the party where
AndrewAndrew was supposedly spinning.

After the episode was shown, Lord McLeod found his Facebook wall and Twitter
feed so bombarded with shout-outs that he decided to leverage the exposure and
start a beauty blog, Amber and Smoke. Family members back home were thrilled to
hear Ms. Dunham refer to him (though not by name) as her ''handsome'' dance
partner on ''The Graham Norton Show,'' the British talk show.

Lord McLeod's micro-fame endured, even after he chopped off his locks. ''I
thought when I cut my hair, people would stop recognizing me,'' he said, ''but a
month ago in a 7-Eleven on Bowery, a guy said, 'Hey, you're the Guy With the
Side Ponytail.' ''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/20/fashion/girls-television-cameos-new-york-city.
html

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Jenna Lyons, president of J. Crew and no stranger to the
spotlight, has been recognized for her role on ''Girls,'' right. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
ELIZABETH D. HERMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
CRAIG BLANKENHORN/HBO) (E1)
Clockwise from top left: Kim Gordon (left) and Michael Cavadias in a cameo on
the show
Ms. Gordon at the premiere of the show's third season
AndrewAndrew, the downtown D.J. duo
Ezra Koenig in a cameo
Rachel Antonoff at the premiere
Jerry Saltz arriving on the red carpet for the premiere
Audrey Gelman on the show and at the after-party for the premiere. (PHOTOGRAPHS
BY ELIZABETH D. HERMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES (KIM GORDON, RACHEL ANTONOFF,
JERRY SALTZ AND AUDREY GELMAN AT THE PREMIERE)
JESSICA MIGLIO/HBO (KIM GORDON AND MICHAEL CAVADIAS ON SHOW, AND EZRA KOENIG ON
SHOW)
TINA FINEBERG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES (ANDREWANDREW)
 JAY MAIDMENT/HBO (AUDREY GELMAN ON SHOW)) (E11)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


