                             1271 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 7, 2014 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Two Ensembles Step Into the Other's Shoes

BYLINE: By VIVIEN SCHWEITZER

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 377 words


It's not unusual for ensembles to have a composer or two in their midst,
although it's certainly more uncommon for all members to be performers and
composers. And it's surely a first for a group to feature a trombone, trumpet,
clarinet and baritone, the combination that makes up the ensemble Loadbang.

During the first half of a concert last week at Symphony Space -- the final
installment in the Cutting Edge Concerts New Music Festival curated by Victoria
Bond -- Loadbang and the Mivos Quartet performed works written by members of the
other ensemble.

The pieces for the string quartet proved the most engaging, in particular
''Crescere e Decrescere'' by Jeffrey Gavett, Loadbang's baritone. Billed as ''a
study in the waxing and waning of proportions in time and tuning,'' the work
uses microtonal intervals to create striking textures, with abrasive gestures
and a slow, sirenlike descent and ascent that rose to a unison note interrupted
by a cello trill.

</ho.w_l> by Carlos Cordeiro (Loadbang's clarinetist) was a setting of Allen
Ginsberg's ''Howl''; Andy Kozar (Loadbang's trumpeter) set a poem by Christian
BÃ¶k in ''Bok: VOWELS.'' Intriguing sonorities were created when members of the
quartet uttered word fragments that meshed with the score.

Loadbang's unusual instrumental and vocal combination poses a challenge for
composers. None of the works written by the Mivos musicians left a strong
impression, although there were striking elements in each, like the cacophonic
brass segments in ''Madrigals,'' by the Mivos violinist Joshua Modney. Mr.
Modney based the work on sonorities taken from works by Gesualdo, reflected here
through a contemporary prism of extended techniques, noise and viola
improvisations by Victor Lowrie.

The violinist Olivia De Prato was inspired by tai chi and poems by Zen monks
while writing her ''Four Corners (with optional string trio spatial drone),''
which featured a jaunty trumpet and clarinet exchange and disjointed fragments
of words uttered by Mr. Gavett.

After intermission Sequitur offered the premiere of Harold Meltzer's
''Variations on a Summer Day,'' based on the poem by Wallace Stevens. The
mezzo-soprano Mary Nessinger sang the enigmatic vocal line, which unfolded over
vividly scored instrumental interludes.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/07/arts/music/loadbang-and-the-mivos-quartet-at-s
ymphony-space.html

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


