                             1208 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Interpretations Looking Back and to the Future

BYLINE: By STEVE SMITH

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 490 words


Think of Colin Stetson as the Neil deGrasse Tyson of the avant-garde saxophone
world: a brilliant adept in a rigorous, esoteric science, but also an adroit
communicator with an uncommon knack for making the arcana of his field
accessible to the layman. In a concert presented by the Ecstatic Music Festival
on Saturday night at Merkin Concert Hall, Mr. Stetson wasted no time in
demonstrating his enviable skill as the prime mover in two unorthodox
collaborations.

As a soloist, Mr. Stetson creates illusions of multitude with his exacting
control of circular breathing, multiphonics and singing through his horns while
playing. His work with indie-rock bands like Bon Iver and Arcade Fire has proved
that he can suit his talent to other conceptions; ''New History Warfare Vol. 3:
To See More Light,'' Mr. Stetson's latest album, showed that he can also
accommodate other voices, and even words, into his own songlike idiom. At
Merkin, after an opening solo saxophone piece, sweetly voiced arrangements of
two selections from that album framed Mr. Stetson's collaboration with the
Brooklyn Youth Chorus, a consistently bold organization that regularly
commissions works from composers representing an unusually broad stylistic
range.

Mr. Stetson, mostly on bass saxophone, provided a low, gassy drone under coolly
harmonized voices in those pieces and in ''Breathing Black Ground,'' by the
violinist Sarah Neufeld, an Arcade Fire associate. Dianne Berkun-Menaker, the
chorus artistic director, deftly coordinated her singers with Ms. Neufeld's
seesawing arcs.

The set included two further selections by Mr. Stetson, jointly commissioned by
the chorus and the festival: ''Mort, j'appelle de ta rigueur,'' a snowy,
shimmering a cappella setting of a 15th-century rondeau, and a new arrangement
of ''All the Days I've Missed You,'' a piece from one of Mr. Stetson's earlier
albums.

The concert's second half was devoted to an arrangement of the first movement
from Gorecki's Symphony No. 3 (''Symphony of Sorrowful Songs''), a morosely
beautiful work that became a global phenomenon through a 1991 Nonesuch
recording. Mr. Stetson recast the music for an ensemble that included current
and former members of Arcade Fire, m√∫m, Liturgy and Superhuman Happiness.

Starting the achingly slow lament on solo contrabass clarinet, Mr. Stetson
layered woodwinds, keyboards, electric guitars, violin, cello and even drums in
a manner faithful to the Gorecki original, with entries cued by Chris Vatalaro,
a keyboardist. Megan Stetson, a mezzo-soprano and Mr. Stetson's sister, sang
with luminosity and poise, the trenchant ache of her lines no less tear-inducing
for being backed by Bernard Gann's fuzzy black-metal guitar tremors and Greg
Fox's double-pedaled kick-drum thunder.

The Ecstatic Music Festival continues with Buke and Gase and So Percussion on
Wednesday night at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan;
212-501-3330, kaufman-center.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/25/arts/music/colin-stetson-and-brooklyn-youth-ch
orus-at-merkin-hall.html

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Colin Stetson and the Brooklyn Youth Chorus performing at Merkin
Concert Hall on Saturday night. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROYUKI ITO FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


