                             1362 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 6, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

30 Years Later, a Cosmos Reanimated

BYLINE: By MIKE RUBIN

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1631 words


On a soggy night in April, Le Poisson Rouge in Greenwich Village provided a
soothing sanctuary from a downpour. At one side of the club's stage, the
composer and record producer Craig Leon conjured a hypnotic drone from his
synthesizer and laptop; on the other, his wife and collaborator, Cassell Webb,
commanded another synth. Between them, the American Contemporary Music Ensemble
string quartet gently bopped bows against violins and cello, keeping time with
the sinuous mechanized pulse.

Above them, animated patterns -- part African masks, part protozoa -- wriggled
past, shifting into colorful images of galaxies and nebulae in an astronomical
psychedelic light show. This was truly a concert of ''space music.''

Some light-years before songs from the first Ramones album were used to flog FX
Network comedies on TV and pump up crowds at Yankee Stadium, Mr. Leon, then 24,
produced that band's 1976 record debut. Over the next year, he also produced New
York landmarks, like debut recordings by Blondie, Richard Hell and Suicide, as
well as the first singles by the Weirdos and the Zeros, the Southern California
punk pioneers. As an A&R scout at Sire Records, he urged his bosses to sign
Talking Heads. Since 1998, however, he has worked exclusively as a composer and
arranger of classical music, collaborating with the likes of Luciano Pavarotti,
Joshua Bell and James Galway.

Less well known but ripe for rediscovery are two albums of his own trailblazing
synth instrumentals that Mr. Leon, 62, recorded three decades ago. The Poisson
Rouge gathering was the first live New York performance of ''Nommos'' (which had
its United States premiere at Moogfest in Asheville, N.C., a few days earlier).
''Nommos'' was originally released in 1981 on John Fahey's Takoma label, its
clangy tribal throb inspired by a 1973 Brooklyn Museum exhibition of ancient
sculptures by the Dogon people of Mali and their interstellar creation mythos.
''Visiting,'' a companion to ''Nommos'' released in 1982 on Mr. Leon's own
Arbitor imprint, is less percussive and more reminiscent of German kosmiche,
full of melodic synth washes.

Prescient in their conception and execution, both albums will be reissued
together on vinyl on July 15 by the New York label RVNG as ''Anthology of
Interplanetary Folk Music Vol. 1: Nommos/Visiting.'' Collectors have long prized
the records, and ''Nommos'' has been bootlegged repeatedly, but this is the
first time Mr. Leon has sanctioned their rerelease (along with a CD edition of
the same recordings that has been available on Harmonia Mundi since April,
titled ''Early Electronic Works''). The impetus arose partly from the release of
a version last year on Superior Viaduct, which licensed it from Concord Music
Group, that was said to have been drawn from the long-lost ''Nommos'' master
tapes. Mr. Leon, who did not give the project his blessing, said it was actually
derived from an inferior copy.

''I didn't want it to be remembered that way,'' he said by phone from Rome,
where he was doing research for a project involving rearrangements of early
vocal music for choir and synth orchestra. ''These are the definitive versions
as it was written and intended.''

For this release, Mr. Leon recreated ''Nommos'' almost note for note with
current technology. ''Actually, I think the new one sounds better,'' he said.
''The recordings are better and bigger and have more depth. The original
'Nommos' actually sounds kind of flat and tinny compared to the new one.''

With their simple ostinato patterns and rhythms evoking African drumming,
''Nommos'' and ''Visiting'' were influenced by George Antheil's radical 1920s
composition ''Ballet MÃ©canique'' and its use of repetition and sequence. Mr.
Leon's music ''occupies a very nebulous space between fourth-world composers,
gritty punk gestures, folk-music obsession and the joys of exploring new
technology,'' said Pete Swanson, an electronic musician working at the
crossroads of noise and techno. ''I don't think there's anything that sounds
like them.''

The records anticipate the genres of New Age, industrial and ambient techno,
making the albums ideal for RVNG's archival series honoring individual pioneers
of electronic music. ''There's a generational shift in consciousness toward that
kind of meditative electronic music,'' Matt Werth, the owner of RVNG, said of
Mr. Leon's work. '' 'Nommos' came out right as New Age was happening, and I'm
sure that it was marketed in some shops as such, but for me, it's much more punk
rock than that. Of course, it has the minimalist composer stamp all over it, but
it feels much more raw, much more alien.''

Mr. Leon is still most recognized for his rock productions: Aside from his punk
milestones, he has worked with more than 80 bands, including the Bangles and the
Fall (who once used ''Nommos'' as their preshow opening music), and with Ms.
Webb, a singer-songwriter whose career began in the 1960s Texas psychedelic
scene. But his classical albums have actually yielded his greatest commercial
success. His 2003 album with Mr. Bell, ''Romance of the Violin,'' spent almost
three years in the Top 10 of the Billboard classical chart.

''In an alternate reality, I would have gone on to doing exactly what I'm doing
now much, much earlier,'' said Mr. Leon, a classically trained pianist who began
playing at the age of 5 outside Fort Myers, Fla. ''But what happened was the
'60s and everything when I was growing up, and I thought that rock 'n' roll was
much more relevant than old-time music.''

After running his own recording studio in Miami, he took a job doing A&R and
in-house production at Sire in 1973 and moved to New York. ''I went up there to
be a producer more than anything else,'' he said. ''I didn't want to play. I
wanted to actually produce and do things in the studio. I was always writing my
own material that I never thought would get published or played.''

Mr. Leon was immediately impressed by Suicide, which had been performing locally
since 1971 without drawing any record label interest. Before he joined Sire, Mr.
Leon said, another label had rescinded a job offer after he suggested signing
Suicide. Suicide's keyboardist, Martin Rev, explained: ''We weren't exactly
embraced by the music industry. We were considered very subversive. We used to
think of ourselves as Che and Castro coming into Cuba under Batista.''

Mr. Leon was convinced that he could do justice to that electronic duo's
abrasive attack. ''Suicide is actually in a weird way one of most unique sounds
ever,'' he said, ''like weird Americana, only on a New York level: It's
rockabilly New York horror, with a little bit of Germany thrown in as well.''

When Marty Thau, Suicide's manager, decided to release a Suicide record on his
Red Star label in 1977, Mr. Leon was tapped to produce. He recorded the band
directly into the board, vocals at the same time as tracks, using dub techniques
he had learned working alongside Bob Marley and Lee Perry on a 1975 production
job in Jamaica. The result was ''basically a live record,'' Mr. Rev said.
''Recording is not absolutely the intensity of live playing,'' he said, ''but it
was a good representation of what we were doing and what we were.''

While most of the influences on Mr. Leon's own music predate New York's downtown
renaissance in the '70s, he was certainly changed by it. ''There was a
minimalist thread running through everything that was done in the Village in
those days, or at least everything that I knew and liked,'' he said. Musicians
like Suicide, Patti Smith and Television ''were of the same ethos as the New
York minimal artists and the New York minimal 'classical' musicians,'' he said.
''I think they all fit together happily, and I guess you could throw my stuff
into that as well, because we were all part of the same scene, so to speak.''

Mr. Leon left New York in 1978, first for Los Angeles, then for Europe. (He and
Ms. Webb settled in England in the mid-1980s.) While in Los Angeles, Mr. Leon
learned that the Takoma label -- known primarily for the acoustic guitar work of
Mr. Fahey and Leo Kottke -- hoped to release a synthesizer album, and he
proposed his ''Nommos'' project. Mr. Leon said that the RVNG collection's title
even derives from his original pitch to Takoma. ''Harry Smith had the
''Anthology of American Folk Music,'' he told Mr. Fahey. ''I'm going to do the
'Anthology of Interplanetary Folk Music.' ''

Mr. Leon was fascinated by the Dogon, whose legends told of visits thousands of
years ago by Nommos, extraterrestrial beings who had journeyed from a double
star system like what astronomers now understand Sirius to be. Much Dogon art
portrayed Nommos figures; song titles on the ''Nommos'' album like ''She Wears a
Hemispherical Skullcap'' are descriptions of Nommos sculptures, in some cases
taken directly from the Brooklyn Museum exhibition catalog. A sci-fi fan, Mr.
Leon decided to create a work of ''speculative fiction'' that imagined ''what
the music was that these guys were actually listening to when they were in
suspended animation with their headphones on for so many years, however long it
took them to get from the double star system of Sirius to Africa.''

Though a groundbreaking synthesizer record, ''Nommos'' was originally intended
to be orchestral, but Mr. Leon didn't have the budget. In a way, the string
section at Le Poisson Rouge brought ''Nommos'' full circle, and Mr. Leon is
gradually building a full orchestral version that he hopes will have its
premiere in the next year.

The attention drawn by the ''Nommos''/''Visiting'' reissue has led classical
labels to commission new compositions from Mr. Leon and take a look at some of
his unreleased work, he said, ''so there's a whole kind of sons of 'Nommos' that
will be coming out over the next few years.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/06/arts/music/craig-leon-rerecords-two-synth-clas
sics.html

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Above, the producer and composer Craig Leon in London last
week. Left, the Ramones, whose first record he produced, performing at CBGB in
the East Village in 1976. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AMELIA TROUBRIDGE FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES
GODLIS) (AR14)
 Blondie in 1976, when the group released its debut album: from left, Gary
Valentine, Chris Stein, Deborah Harry, Jimmy Destri and Clem Burke. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY CHRIS WALTER/GETTY IMAGES) (AR15)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


