                             1360 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 6, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Relationship Where Marriage Is Freedom

BYLINE: By MICHAEL M. GRYNBAUM

SECTION: Section ST; Column 0; Society Desk; VOWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1413 words


In the close-knit world of New York City's gay scene, circa 1992, Randy Florke
was a somebody: flaxen-haired model, up-and-coming designer, Studio 54 habitu√©
and downtown bon vivant. But on the night he met the man who would become his
husband two decades later, he was being treated like a nobody.

The doorman at the Roxy nightclub in Chelsea, a popular hangout, had failed to
recognize him, sending Mr. Florke into an unfamiliar social Siberia: waiting in
line on the sidewalk outside. Sulking, he barely noticed the slightly tipsy and
very nervous younger man waiting next to him.

Sean Patrick Maloney had never been to a New York gay club. And he had never
encountered anyone like Mr. Florke.

''He was a beautiful guy,'' Mr. Maloney recalled, describing himself at the time
as ''among the great unwashed.'' A budding politico, Mr. Maloney had told no one
that he was gay; at the Roxy, he was too frightened to even say his first name.
Screwing up the courage to greet Mr. Florke, he introduced himself as
''Patrick.''

Their differences melted away on the dance floor. When Mr. Florke wrote his
number on a napkin, Mr. Maloney put it in his wallet. He kept it there for 20
years.

Mr. Florke, 51, and Mr. Maloney, 47, who was elected in 2012 as New York's first
openly gay congressman, were married last month at a church near their home in
Cold Spring, N.Y., as their three children looked on. Representative Nancy
Pelosi, the House minority leader, gave a toast. Joan Osborne, the pop singer,
crooned a ballad for their first dance.

It was a moment that neither could have predicted from that night at the Roxy,
when Mr. Florke, heartbroken from losing a longtime partner, was only seeking a
casual fling; when Mr. Maloney, about to start work at a white-shoe law firm,
was still wondering, and worrying, about what it would be like to date a man.

Each had arrived in Manhattan via very different paths. The son of an Iowa
farmer, Mr. Florke came out when he was young and moved to New York at 18,
enrolling in a fashion course. Mr. Maloney was the youngest of six children in a
staunch Catholic family and attended elite schools, where he dated women.

''I was so dramatically different from the world that he had come from,'' Mr.
Florke said. But at the time, it suited him: ''He was just coming out of the
closet. I thought it was perfect, because he wouldn't be looking to have a
relationship.''

At first, they met only at night, after Mr. Maloney told friends he was going to
bed. But Mr. Maloney was persistent, even as he traveled the country working on
Bill Clinton's 1992 presidential campaign. On a day back in New York, he
persuaded Mr. Florke to call in sick so they could spend it together. ''I am a
German Midwesterner. I do not miss work,'' Mr. Florke said. But the date brought
them closer. ''I realized, I could like this person.''

Still, bliss did not come instantly. Mr. Maloney moved in, and then moved out;
exploring life out of the closet, ''I was finally let loose,'' he recalled. Mr.
Florke was wary of the pressure of being somebody's first boyfriend. ''It was
playing with fire,'' he said.

Then a 3-year-old named Jesus (pronounced hay-SOOS) came into their lives.

He was the grandson of a colleague of Mr. Florke's, whose parents were drug
addicts. Mr. Florke, wanting to help, looked after him on weekends; often, Mr.
Maloney came, too. The three grew closer. ''Suddenly, we're raising a child
full-time,'' Mr. Maloney said.

For a fledgling relationship, it was intense. (''Like going over the waterfall
in a barrel,'' as Mr. Maloney put it.) But it also set a template that would
come to dominate their union over the years: Mr. Florke making life-altering
decisions, and Mr. Maloney, so cautious in his own life, realizing he was
happier because of it.

''A lot of us spend our lives assuming we are going to get around to those
things we want to do,'' Mr. Maloney said. Randy, he added approvingly, ''knows
what he wants.''

What had seemed so intimidating at first turned into a gift. At the time, Mr.
Maloney was struggling to tell his parents that he was gay. Having a child in
the picture, he said, helped them understand that he still wanted a family of
his own.

That was what Mr. Florke wanted, too. A child of divorce who grew up shuttling
among relatives, he was eager, finally, to have stability in his life. Mr.
Maloney and Jesus offered it. ''In the end, we had the same goals,'' Mr. Florke
said.

When Jesus's mother died, the couple adopted him. Mr. Maloney, working for the
Clinton administration, began commuting six hours on weekends to upstate New
York, where Mr. Florke was renovating country homes. (The couple has lived in 17
different houses over the years.) One day, Mr. Florke called Mr. Maloney
long-distance about a young girl who was up for adoption.

''I could remember thinking, 'He so already said yes,' '' Mr. Maloney said,
laughing. ''That in a nutshell is how decisions get made in my household.''

Daley, now their daughter, was adopted in 2001; Essie, another daughter,
followed two years later. The couple eventually moved to Cold Spring, where Mr.
Maloney narrowly won a seat in Congress. (Mr. Florke had his own breakout
moment, starring in an A & E reality show about his real estate business.)

After two decades together, marriage was not a priority. But last year, Mr.
Florke traveled to Washington to hear the arguments before the Supreme Court on
same-sex marriage. He left profoundly shaken, hurt by the words of those who
spoke against change; he thought of friends who died of AIDS and what they had
missed.

That summer, driving upstate, he heard on the radio that the court had struck
down the Defense of Marriage Act -- followed by the voice of Mr. Maloney, being
interviewed about the decision. Mr. Florke felt something stir. ''When something
is not really accessible to you, part of your brain pretends like it doesn't
want it,'' he said.

On Christmas morning, with their children at his side, Mr. Florke presented Mr.
Maloney with a Tumi suitcase. Inside was a proposal: ''Travel with me forever.''

''He doesn't depend on me for his happiness, and I don't depend on him for my
happiness,'' Mr. Florke said. ''We respect each other. We allow each other to be
who we have to be.''

On June 21, 250 guests squeezed inside the Episcopal Church of St.
Mary-in-the-Highlands, an impeccably restored granite structure, for a wedding
ceremony performed by its rector, the Rev. Shane Scott-Hamblen. As ''My Country,
'Tis of Thee'' played, guests rose from their seats to recite words by Thomas
Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln and President Obama that touched on America's
evolving notion of equality. The reception, at the couple's home, was less
politics, more Roxy. Ms. Osborne shimmied on the dance floor to Chaka Khan, as
Ms. Pelosi, in hot-pink sunglasses, chatted with Chris Hughes, the Facebook
co-founder and owner of The New Republic.

A small drone, sounding like a swarm of locusts, swooped over the crowd,
snapping pictures. ''That thing is going to kill somebody,'' said Huma Abedin,
an aide to Hillary Rodham Clinton and a friend of Mr. Maloney, who attended with
her husband, the former Congressman Anthony D. Weiner.

The grooms wore identical Ralph Lauren dinner jackets -- black for the ceremony,
cream-hued for the reception. In his toast, Representative Steny H. Hoyer told
the crowd he was single, ''so I have taken the liberty of writing my telephone
number on a napkin.''

The evening ended with fireworks above the lawn. But at the altar, Mr. Maloney
had abruptly found himself in tears, unable to speak. Seconds passed before he
collected himself to recite his vows.

''It was like an eternity,'' Mr. Maloney said afterward, both embarrassed and
elated. Mr. Florke, by his side, smiled at his husband. After 22 years, he
hadn't minded waiting a few seconds more.

ON THIS DAY: When June 21, 2014 Where Episcopal Church of St.
Mary-in-the-Highlands, Cold Spring, N.Y. Reception at the couple's home, which
features a dramatic view of the Bear Mountain Bridge crossing the Hudson River.
Details In her toast, Representative Nancy Pelosi, the House minority leader,
prompted applause and laughter with a one-liner: ''I don't know many people who
would relate marriage with freedom.'' The First Dance For the couple's first
dance, Joan Osborne, who had a hit in 1995 with ''One of Us,'' sang ''Make You
Feel My Love,'' by Bob Dylan. Mr. Florke sold Ms. Osborne her home in the
Catskills, and they have been close friends since.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/06/fashion/weddings/a-relationship-where-marriage
-is-freedom.html

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Sean Patrick Maloney, at left, above, and Randy Florke donned
matching Ralph Lauren dinner  jackets -- white for the reception, black for the
ceremony-- for their wedding in Cold Spring, N.Y. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LAUREN
LANCASTER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


