                             1313 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

G.I.'s Vanishing Before Capture Angered His Unit

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, HELENE COOPER and CHARLIE SAVAGE.; Eric Schmitt and
Charlie Savage reported from Washington, and Helene Cooper from Brussels. Andrew
W. Lehren contributed reporting from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1102 words


WASHINGTON -- Sometime after midnight on June 30, 2009, Pfc. Bowe Bergdahl left
behind a note in his tent saying he had become disillusioned with the Army, did
not support the American mission in Afghanistan and was leaving to start a new
life. He slipped off the remote military outpost in Paktika Province on the
border with Pakistan and took with him a soft backpack, water, knives, a
notebook and writing materials, but left behind his body armor and weapons --
startling, given the hostile environment around his outpost.

That account, provided by a former senior military officer briefed on the
investigation into the private's disappearance, is part of a more complicated
picture emerging of the capture of a soldier whose five years as a Taliban
prisoner influenced high-level diplomatic negotiations, brought in foreign
governments, and ended with him whisked away on a helicopter by American
commandos.

The release of Sergeant Bergdahl (he was promoted in captivity) has created
political problems for the Obama administration, which is having to defend his
exchange for five Taliban detainees held at Guant√°namo Bay, Cuba, but it also
presents delicate politics for Republicans who are attacking, through
surrogates, America's last known prisoner of war.

The furious search for Sergeant Bergdahl, his critics say, led to the deaths of
at least two soldiers and possibly six others in the area. Pentagon officials
say those charges are unsubstantiated and are not supported by a review of a
database of casualties in the Afghan war.

''Yes, I'm angry,'' Joshua Cornelison, a former medic in Sergeant Bergdahl's
platoon, said in an interview on Monday arranged by Republican strategists.
''Everything that we did in those days was to advance the search for Bergdahl.
If we were doing some mission and there was a reliable report that Bergdahl was
somewhere, our orders were that we were to quit that mission and follow that
report.''

Sergeant Bergdahl slipped away from his outpost, the former senior officer said,
possibly on foot but more likely hiding in a contractor's vehicle. ''He didn't
walk out the gate through a checkpoint, and there was no evidence he breached
the perimeter wire and left that way,'' the ex-officer said.

It was not until the 9 a.m. roll call on June 30 that the 29 soldiers of Second
Platoon, Blackfoot Company, learned he was gone.

''I was woken up by my platoon leader,'' said Mr. Cornelison, who had gone to
sleep just three hours before after serving watch from 11 p.m. to 2 a.m. ''Hey
Doc,'' his platoon leader said. ''Have you seen Bergdahl?''

Platoon members said Sergeant Bergdahl, of Hailey, Idaho, was known as bookish
and filled with romantic notions that some found odd.

''He wouldn't drink beer or eat barbecue and hang out with the other
20-year-olds,'' Cody Full, another member of Sergeant Bergdahl's platoon, said
in an interview on Monday also arranged by Republican strategists. ''He was
always in his bunk. He ordered Rosetta Stone for all the languages there,
learning Dari and Arabic and Pashto.''

The soldiers began a frantic search for Sergeant Bergdahl using Predator drones,
Apache attack helicopters and military tracking dogs. The most intense search
operation, leaked war reports show, wound down after eight days -- well before
the deaths of six soldiers on patrols in Paktika Province in late August and
early September. But, complicating matters, some soldiers contend they were
effectively searching for 90 days because of clear orders: If they heard rumors
from locals that Sergeant Bergdahl might be nearby, they should patrol the area.

Mr. Full, then a specialist in the platoon, said he and other platoon members
grew increasingly bitter at the time they were spending looking for Sergeant
Bergdahl. ''He had sent all his belongings home -- his computer, personal
items,'' said Mr. Full, now 25. He said Sergeant Bergdahl used to gaze at the
mountains around them and say he wondered if he could get to China from there.
Other platoon members said that Sergeant Bergdahl wrote Jason Bourne-type novels
in which he inserted himself as the lead character.

The anger toward Sergeant Bergdahl increased exponentially after Sept. 4, when
they learned that two members of Third Platoon, which routinely went on tandem
missions with Second Platoon and who they believed were also searching for
Sergeant Bergdahl, had been killed in an ambush. Pfc. Matthew Martinek and Lt.
Darryn Andrews, both of them friends of Mr. Cornelison, died in the ambush. A
Defense Department official said it was unclear whether the two men were killed
directly because of the search for Sergeant Bergdahl.

Some soldiers have also contended that the Taliban, knowing the units were out
searching extensively for Sergeant Bergdahl, chose July 4, 2009, to attack
another combat outpost, which was nearly overrun and several soldiers were
killed. But American military officers said they saw no evidence that the
Taliban started the attack on the outpost because they thought everyone would be
out searching for Sergeant Bergdahl.

A second former senior military officer, who also was briefed on the Bergdahl
investigation, said there was no direct evidence that diversion of surveillance
aircraft or troops to search for Sergeant Bergdahl encouraged the Taliban
attacks, or left other American troops vulnerable. ''This was a dangerous region
in Afghanistan in the middle of the 'fighting season,' '' the officer said in an
email, adding that although the search ''could have created some opportunities
for the enemy,'' it is ''difficult to establish a direct cause and effect.''

A review of the database of casualties in the Afghan war suggests that Sergeant
Bergdahl's critics appear to be blaming him for every American soldier killed in
Paktika Province in the four-month period that followed his disappearance.

Mr. Cornelison and Mr. Full both said they wanted to see Sergeant Bergdahl
court-martialed as a deserter. ''I'm not going to speak on the political, but I
think that now that he's back, he needs to be held accountable,'' Mr. Full said.

Mr. Cornelison echoed Mr. Full. ''I won't get into the politics, but now that
he's back he needs to be held 100 percent accountable,'' he said. ''For putting
myself and 29 other people in my platoon in hell for 90 days.''

Rear Adm. John F. Kirby, the Pentagon spokesman, said that there was a larger
matter at play: The American military does not leave soldiers behind. ''When
you're in the Navy, and you go overboard, it doesn't matter if you were pushed,
fell or jumped,'' he said. ''We're going to turn the ship around and pick you
up.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/03/us/us-soldier-srgt-bowe-bergdahl-of-idaho-pow-
vanished-angered-his-unit.html

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


