                             1309 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rock Relics With a Signature Swagger

BYLINE: By CARRIE BATTAN

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1263 words


After a recent dinner at a restaurant in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, Andrew Savage,
the 28-year-old guitarist and vocalist of Parquet Courts, reached into his
pocket to check his text messages. The device he pulled out, a beat-up old
clamshell model, seemed a pointed rejection of modernity, even among
nonconformist New Yorkers.

But it ties in neatly with the ethos that Mr. Savage and his band mates have
cultivated since they formed Parquet Courts in late 2010. These musicians are
self-styled rock traditionalists at a time when tradition is in short supply.

Mr. Savage and two of his band mates, the guitarist and vocalist Austin Brown,
28, and the drummer Max Savage, 22 (Andrew's brother), have roots in Denton,
Tex.; the band's bassist, Sean Yeaton, 28, is from Boston. But you could call
them a New York heritage band, if such a thing exists today.

''I like to think of ourselves that way,'' Mr. Savage said before running
through a list of benchmark New York acts whose names he'd like to see Parquet
Courts counted among one day: Velvet Underground, Thugs, New York Dolls,
Ramones, Talking Heads, Suicide, Sonic Youth.

At a time when New York -- Brooklyn in particular -- is teeming with overlapping
clusters of scenes and experimental microgenres, Parquet Courts' reverence and
excitement for the city's rock 'n' roll tradition make them outliers. They have
purposefully inserted themselves into a clear-cut lineage at a time when the
very idea of lineage is on the brink of dissolution.

''They come out of a songwriter-garage-band continuum of folks who collected
records and were connoisseurs of music and recreated a stripped-down rock 'n'
roll sound,'' said Todd Patrick, a Brooklyn music-scene fixture known as Todd P
who has been booking DIY shows since he moved to New York in 2001. Mr. Patrick
met the band members when they were still living in Texas and performing
locally. ''They hit a lot of tasteful -- dare I say canonical? -- notes,'' he
said.

On Tuesday, What's Your Rupture? and Mom & Pop Music will release Parquet
Courts' ''Sunbathing Animal,'' a sophomore album that draws clear lines of
influence and invites listeners to locate these threads of familiarity. There is
the striking economy and rawness of acts like Wire, for example. The undeniable
punk hooks of the Ramones. The detailed lyrics delivered in a dry, disaffected
drone Ã  la Lou Reed, or Stephen Malkmus in his Pavement days.

Their new album is more spacious and deliberate than last year's debut, ''Light
Up Gold,'' a high-adrenaline straightforward collection of punk songs recorded
in a three-day frenzy. The album's title track sustains the dizzy energy of a
traditional hardcore punk song for two or three minutes longer than is
customary. And the new songs sometimes unravel at a psychedelically slow pace,
as with the seven-minute-plus ''Instant Disassembly,'' which finds Mr. Savage
waxing nostalgic: ''Turn on the white-noise murmur of the A.M. band/And the last
classic rock band's last solid record creeps in/A call out of the blue from an
old, old friend.'

The band's music ''has an urban swagger and anxiety to it that is distinctly New
York,'' said Jonathan Schenke, who produced the new album. ''It has the '70s
punk, Please Kill Me-era vibes to it.''

There are, of course, countless guitar-based bands making music in New York City
today. But they cohabitate with an increasingly diverse group of genres and
artists, none of which can exactly be pinpointed as the city's musical center.

On any given night in Brooklyn's northern neighborhoods, it's possible to hear
Parquet Courts and their friends perform in one small space, while an
underground rapper, a house D.J. or a singer-songwriter takes the stage in
another down the block. Parties at the Williamsburg DIY landmark 285 Kent, which
closed in January, often featured diverse lineups, like the bill one evening in
2012 when the ambient electro-pop star Grimes took the stage beside the Harlem
rapper ASAP Rocky.

In a departure from New York's past, there is no punk hub like CBGB's, no hero
like the Julian Casablancas of the Strokes to be spotted loping around the East
Village.

Mr. Savage said he left Texas in his early 20s out of sheer restlessness. ''New
York appealed to me chiefly'' because he was tired of small-town life. ''I
didn't move to New York for any scene.''

In interviews, he has routinely emphasized his desire for Parquet Courts to be
considered a New York band. Even before arriving, he adopted some of the spirit
of the metropolis, familiarizing himself with Not For Tourists, a city guide
devoted to finding locales off the beaten path.

''I've always been a fan of geography and maps, and I was looking at maps of New
York a lot,'' Mr. Savage said. ''I had started memorizing street grids.''

Mr. Yeaton met the other members of Parquet Courts at a show with one of his
former bands in Denton. As a college student, he had spent time in New York
during an internship at Spin, and he moved to the city after graduation, working
for a period at Vice magazine. Over dinner, it become clear that Andrew Savage
is the band's spiritual guide: He does most of the talking, and uses the first
person in discussing matters that involve the band as a whole.

Mr. Brown chimed in here and there, and Mr. Yeaton provided comic relief. Max
Savage, who is studying math and Chinese at New York University, seemed to keep
to himself, letting his band mates do the talking.

Rather than lament the decline of the onetime New York punk monolith, Parquet
Courts is interested in celebrating the vitality of one of the city's many
niches. The band displays a rare earnestness in a milieu that is naturally
jaded, said Jarvis Taveniere, a member of the band Woods who played drums with
Parquet Courts in some of its earliest sessions. ''Especially being in
Brooklyn,'' he said, ''it's easy to be around people who make fun of things or
don't want to give things the new time of day.''

Last year, in conjunction with the release of an EP called ''Tally All the
Things That You Broke,'' Parquet Courts offered a limited-edition mixtape filled
with favorite music made by their peers, including relatively unknown acts like
Total Control and PC Worship. And in its early days, the band put together a
compilation of the artists whom it considers its influences.

Parquet Courts has achieved an unusual level of success outside local
garage-rock circles. ''Light Up Gold,'' which has sold about 40,000 copies since
it was released, has been praised by the likes of Pitchfork and Spin; the band
recently brought its feverish brand of rock to ''The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy
Fallon'' and ''Late Night With Seth Meyers.''

It has also been booked at ever larger music festivals across the country,
where, the band members said, they tend to feel even more like outsiders,
perhaps because the wane of tradition and the fragmentation of genres are more
pronounced on a national scale. Loud, unadorned rock music, oddly enough, can
seem a bit exotic, especially to audiences that will be watching an electronic
dance D.J., a thrash band, a bedroom producer and a dance-pop singer perform on
the same stage.

''The music we play, it's kind of like a quaint relic,'' Mr. Brown said. ''I
feel a responsibility to show them, look what we're doing. I'm hammered drunk
right now and having a blast, and I'm playing a guitar, and there are no laptops
onstage. It makes me feel old.''

Mr. Yeaton said: ''In the last couple of years, I've been really shocked at
having to field questions that involve this 'guitar music' thing. I'm like, 'You
mean music?' ''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/arts/music/parquet-courts-proudly-hews-to-trad
ition.html

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: From left, in Greenpoint,  Brooklyn: Andrew Savage,  Austin
Brown, Sean  Yeaton and Max Savage  of the band Parquet  Courts. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
BRIAN HARKIN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


