                             1378 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Marching Bands, Kierkegaard and Other Musical Influences

BYLINE: By NATE CHINEN

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; PLAYLIST; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 815 words


My Brightest Diamond


NONE MORE THAN YOU

Shara Worden, the operatically trained singer at the core of My Brightest
Diamond, has a feeling for both the grandeur and the grain, building every
sweeping gesture in her music out of a swarm of small details. ''Pressure,'' the
lead single from her forthcoming album on Asthmatic Kitty, stacks her voice
against the coordinated clatter of a marching band, as she sings of ''the weight
of a billion years.'' The album, ''This Is My Hand,'' won't be released until
mid-September, but she has a five-song EP, ''None More Than You,'' due out on
the same label Tuesday. Unlike ''Pressure,'' its songs are mostly inward
seeking, with the subconscious as a binding theme. ''Slow,'' she sings in
''Dreaming Awake,'' unfurling the word in an arpeggiated arc; ''What is all this
rushing about?'' she adds later in the song, which appears in two versions, a
naturalistic Mason Jar Music production and a flintier mix by Son Lux. ''Dreams
Don't Look Like'' has an arrangement that evokes Radiohead, and lyrics about the
tension between dreaming and reality. And ''That Point When'' is a ballad about
the uncertain threshold at the edge of impossibility.


Matt Pavolka

THE HORNS BAND

There's a smattering of high-literary references on ''The Horns Band'' (Fresh
Sound New Talent), an engrossing new album by the jazz bassist Matt Pavolka.
Don't get too hung up on them, or you might scare up more questions than answers
-- begin to wonder, for example, why ''Vheissu,'' inspired by Thomas Pynchon's
novel ''V,'' worries a single melodic phrase in a way that seems better suited
to ''Recollected Forward,'' named after Kierkegaard's concept of repetition.
Anyway, what matters is Mr. Pavolka's intently soulful writing for the cornetist
Kirk Knuffke, the trombonist Jacob Garchik, the alto saxophonist Loren Stillman
and the drummer Mark Ferber. Drawing from contemporary strategies as well as the
small-group music of Duke Ellington, his compositions accomplish a lot with
earthy beauty and shifting momentum. At their best, as on ''The Night the Blind
Man Dreamt That He Was Blind'' (for Jos√© Saramago), they suggest a gradually
forming picture.

Wray

WRAY

A wash of distortion, a motorik beat, an impassive and nearly drowned-out vocal:
These are the essential building blocks for Wray, a three-piece band pursuing
its own extrapolation of shoegaze, surf-punk and lo-fi garage-rock. On its
self-titled debut album, due out Tuesday on Communicating Vessels, most of the
tunes work their way into ruts, finding something trancelike in the process.
''May 15,'' the album's centerpiece, does this best, but there are analogous
moments on ''Apacheria,'' the sturdy lead single, and ''Relative,'' the closing
track. The band's members -- David Brown on bass and vocals, David Swatzell on
guitar and vocals and Blake Wimberly on drums -- hail from Birmingham, Ala.,
though they sound about as rooted in downtown Los Angeles, the Thames Valley of
England and the Bushwick section of Brooklyn. That blurriness is no coincidence,
but let's grant for now that it's more than a pose.

Mndsgn

SURFACE OUTTAKES

The underground hip-hop producer Ringgo Ancheta, who lives in Los Angeles and
goes by Mndsgn (as in ''mind design''), favors murky, underwater sounds, trippy
and irresolute. ''Surface Outtakes'' -- his new release on Leaving
Records/Stones Throw, available for digital download or as a limited-edition
cassette -- suggests a sticky syrup boiled down from ingredients harvested in
the peak production years of soul-jazz. Sometimes, as on ''Eggs'' and
''Overwhelming Gratitude,'' he reaches for groovy bliss, relying on chiming
Fender Rhodes piano; a track like ''Dialect'' goes in for a more ambient,
brooding drone. ''Seemingly All G,'' one of three tracks included only on the
cassette, involves a formless rustle of bass, synthesizer and what sounds like a
gamelan. Mndsgn's official debut album on Stones Throw, ''Yawn Zen,'' is due out
on Aug. 26, but these scraps and B-sides offer plenty to mull over.

People

3XAWOMAN

Forget about hammering any straight logic out of ''3xaWoman,'' the deliriously
wily new album by People, on the artist-run label Telegraph Harp. A
deconstruction of pop songcraft that doubles as a slanted celebration of it, the
album signals a new level of ambition for People, which until recently was a duo
of heavy improvisers, the guitarist and vocalist Mary Halvorson and the drummer
Kevin Shea. Joining them on bass and acoustic guitar is Kyle Forester, of
Crystal Stilts; like Mr. Shea, he also sings. The sly self-referentiality in
these tunes can get to be a bit much, but even then -- as in ''A Song With
Melody and Harmony and Words and Rhythm'' -- there's so much rigor in the
execution that it would feel incurious simply to move on. Several tracks feature
baroquelike horn arrangements by the trumpeter Peter Evans, which manage to fit
right in.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/13/arts/music/marching-bands-kierkegaard-and-othe
r-musical-influences.html

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Shara Worden of My Brightest Diamond, whose new EP is ''None
More Than You.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY JULIEN BOURGEOIS)
From left, Kevin Shea, Kyle Forester and Mary Halvorson of People.
Mndsgn has issued ''Surface Outtakes'' ahead of an official debut album.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY THEO JEMISON)
 From left, Blake Wimberly, David Swatzell and David Brown of Wray, a band from
Birmingham, Ala. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAN KING)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


