                             1377 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Future Tense

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHULMILLER.

Eric Schulmiller is the cantor of the Reconstructionist Synagogue of the North
Shore on Long Island.

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; RIFF; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 1820 words


On July 5, 2010, the 25th anniversary of the release of ''Back to the Future,''
Total Film magazine tweeted an exciting image to its 30,000 followers. The image
showed the dashboard clock of Doc Brown's famous time-traveling DeLorean, from
the second ''Back to the Future'' film, in which Doc, Marty and Jennifer travel
to the future -- and the date displayed was July 5, 2010! Countless fans --
along with everyone from The Guardian to the film's producer, Frank Marshall --
retweeted, favorited and emailed the DeLorean dashboard in euphoric celebration.
The future had finally arrived.

It was quickly revealed to be a photoshopped hoax -- an inside joke that had
spiraled out of control. The actual date to which Doc, Marty and Jennifer
traveled in their garbage-powered flying car was Oct. 21, 2015. The future, it
turned out, was still five years away.

In 2012, Mattel issued a limited edition, ''movie accurate'' hoverboard,
complete with the hole that was left when Marty pulled out the handlebars. To
the disappointment of physics-ignorant fans everywhere, the hoverboard did not
hover (or do anything remotely fun or useful at all).

The previous year, Nike issued a limited release of 1,500 pairs of Marty McFly's
''futuristic'' Air Mag sneakers, which were immediately snatched up at an
auction to raise millions for the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's
Research. Although in appearance they possessed a certain fidelity to the
1989/2015 originals, they were not, in fact, self-lacing.

In 2012, the Florida Marlins rebranded themselves as the Miami Marlins, and
Major League Baseball began discussing a realignment that would move a National
League team to the American League. Suddenly, the possibility of a 2015 World
Series matchup between the Cubs and Miami -- as foretold in ''Back to the Future
Part II'' -- seemed tantalizingly real. But the Houston Astros, not the Cubs,
were chosen to switch leagues, and Miami and Chicago remained in the National
League (and remained more or less awful).

Later in 2012, a tweet designed to promote the release of the ''Back to the
Future'' trilogy box set again showed a doctored DeLorean dashboard, and set off
another round of Future Day hysteria, despite the eye-rollings of die-hard
''B.T.T.F.'' fans, Snopes devotees and other normally hoax-savvy Internet
denizens. That image of the DeLorean dashboard, altered to show some new day,
keeps popping up year after year, and we, like impatient children in the back
seat of a car on a long road trip, keep forwarding it to one another, as if
asking the age-old question again and again and again:

Are we there yet?

Fifty years ago, the New York World's Fair gave 50 million visitors a glimpse
into a hopeful future, powered by a blossoming space age and the belief that all
the world's problems could be solved by corporations and their technological
wonders. As guests streamed out of G.M.'s Futurama II or G.E.'s Progressland (a
Disney creation now continuously in operation at Disney World since 1975), their
gaze was fixed toward a future full of promise, one they had collectively
imagined in their car fins, Googie architecture and clothing designed by
Courr√®ges, Cardin and other space-age visionaries.

In attendance among the throngs that summer was Isaac Asimov, whom The New York
Times commissioned to write an article predicting how 1964's visions of tomorrow
might materialize . . . in 2014. This August will mark the 50th anniversary of
Asimov's piece, and his prophecies have already been picked apart, lauded or
laughed at, as we sit in judgment of Asimov's vision -- his framing of a world
that he knew could exist only if humankind embraced a central motto of the fair:
Peace Through Understanding.

The following decade, however, did not offer much in the way of peace nor
understanding, and by the '70s and '80s, we were just as interested in gazing
longingly behind us toward a sentimentally reconstructed version of a simpler
past as we were in peering ahead toward the dystopian future that was most
likely headed our way. We were awash in nostalgia. We yearned for a little house
on the prairie or a Baltimore diner or a doo-wop reboot or a drag race by the
Fonz down a suburban Milwaukee street.

But in addition to our retreat into wishfulness, something else was brewing: a
sense that the past was not only better than the present, but that the past's
predictions for the future were also better than what had actually become the
present. No longer content to live in (or through) our memories of the past, we
also yearned to live in the past's vision of the future. We were nostalgic for
yesterday's prognostications: You could say that we succumbed to prognostalgia.

For example, the atomic-age architecture and populuxe designs of the '50s and
'60s were reclaimed as artifacts from a future that never was -- all part of a
retrofuturist aesthetic that a character from a 1981 William Gibson short story
termed ''raygun Gothic.'' As our hopes for the future grew dimmer, we retreated
into the fantasies of prognostalgia to avoid what our present had seemingly
become: the darkest timeline.

Asimov also once wrote that the ''future is too important to be lost under the
burden of juvenile folly,'' yet today we are less concerned with preparing for
an impending future of climate change, overpopulation and ever-bloodier ethnic
conflicts than with keeping score among the various cultural predictions from
the past about our present moment. Automatic coffee makers? Ding! Moon colonies?
Bzzzt! Robot cars? Sort of! Self-lacing sneakers? Still waiting, Nike! With the
anniversary of Asimov's World's Fair essay, and the approach of the future of
2015 (with multiple movie cameos and viral videos this year alone, Christopher
Lloyd is already having his own little Doc holiday), we are entering a golden
age of prognostalgia.

Besides the cresting wave of ''Back to the Future'' memorabilia (futurobilia?),
I have lately found myself strangely comforted by intimations from other
predicted futures. In 2019, we may not be living in a world of vengeful,
mistreated human replicants, but I can already see Ridley Scott smiling down on
me from the glowing valley of advertisements in Times Square, or better yet from
the three gleaming LCDs' worth of deliciously pouring coffee at my local Dunkin'
Donuts or McDonald's. Skynet may not have become self-aware in 1997, but in a
few years, flying autonomous Amazon drones may deliver my ''Terminator''
complete-saga, deluxe holographic box set right to my door.

These thoughts have left me wondering if there might be a way that our
prognostalgia can lead, if not to a better world, than at least to better
versions of ourselves. The Yiddish proverb says, ''Man plans, God laughs.'' But
after God laughs, what then does man do? Buy replica bottles of retrofuturistic
Pepsi from an animated Michael Jackson kiosk?

In an alternate ending to ''Terminator 2,'' available on some special-edition
DVDs, 30 years after the 1997 apocalypse she helped avoid, Sarah Connor asserts:
''The dark future which never came still exists for me. And it always will, like
the traces of a dream.'' Maybe these totems from a future that never was can
help us reconcile our current selves with the dream traces of what we once
envisioned for our own futures.

Thirty years ago, I was a chubby Jewish kid with glasses and a considerable
amount of musical talent. Even before I had ever heard the term EGOT, Marvin
Hamlisch was my spirit animal. By the time I went to college, I had hopes of
becoming the next Keith Jarrett. Twenty years ago, bachelor's degree in jazz
piano in hand, I entered the seminary at Hebrew Union College to become a
cantor. Although my present-day life is far different from the one I imagined as
a 10- or even 20-year-old, I'd like to think I embody at least some traces of
those nonrealized futures in my very fulfilling life. The dot-matrix playbill
that I made in 1984 with Print Shop sits on my desk as I write the music for
this year's Purim spiel. The poster from my jazz group's debut (and as it turns
out, only) performance at the old downtown Knitting Factory hangs in the hall,
as I improvise the lilting chants for a Friday-night service, or riff with my
bar and bat mitzvah students about the meaning of life.

When Michael J. Fox rocked out on guitar at the Enchantment Under the Sea dance
at the climax of the original ''Back to the Future,'' he was faking it --
everything from the rhythm-and-blues chords to the Van Halen licks. But by the
time the sequel rolled round, his chops were legit. In between ''Back to the
Future'' movies, Fox made ''Light of Day,'' a movie that Fox once described as
''closer to me than any role I've played. When I was a kid, my dream was to be a
musician. When I was 14 or 15, I played in garage bands. I was kind of a hack
guitarist, which means I wasn't very good, but I was dedicated. When I started
acting, I dropped the music.''

In ''Light of Day,'' Fox plays Joan Jett's more responsible sibling, who is
caught between his desire to be a rock star and his feelings of obligation to
his family. In a review for The Chicago Sun-Times, Roger Ebert sagely noted a
thread that ran through ''Light of Day'' and several of the screenwriter Paul
Schrader's previous films, including ''Taxi Driver'' and ''Raging Bull.'' They
each contained ''wildly different characters with one thing in common: Their
pasts keep them imprisoned and shut them off from happiness in the present.''

When the author and famed diarist Ana√Øs Nin was my age, and living in postwar
New York, she wrote in her journal: ''We do not grow absolutely,
chronologically. We grow sometimes in one dimension, and not in another,
unevenly. We grow partially. We are relative. We are mature in one realm,
childish in another. The past, present and future mingle and pull us backward,
forward, or fix us in the present. We are made up of layers, cells,
constellations.''

There's a scene in ''Back to the Future 2'' when 1985 Jennifer is sneaking out
of the closet in her future self's home, and she watches in horror as her future
husband struggles to play even one note from Huey Lewis and the News's ''Power
of Love'' (now as much of an oldie as Chuck Berry's hits were back in 1985) with
his shaky, disabled right hand.

I thought of that scene when I recently saw a video of Michael J. Fox, hunched
over his guitar, jamming to ''Johnny B. Goode'' with Chris Martin of Coldplay at
a Parkinson's benefit last fall. It felt in that moment as if many timelines
were converging. As in Zemeckis's films, Fox was playing his heart out to avoid
disappearing from his own future. Yet instead of destruction brought about by
Marty's compulsive need to prove his manhood, Fox was embracing not only the
kitschy recollection of that iconic scene, but also inhabiting the space between
the future we all imagined and the one we are compelled by fate to inhabit.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/13/magazine/the-future-sure-looks-better-from-the
-past.html

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY TOM GAULD)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


