                             1327 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 16, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dangerous Divisiveness

BYLINE: By CHARLES M. BLOW

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 791 words


For an increasing number of Americans, the tenor of politics has reached a
near-religious pitch, in which people on opposing ends of the ideological scale
take on theological properties: good or evil, angels or demons, here to either
save our way of life or destroy it.

According to a report released last week by the Pew Research Center for the
People and the Press: ''Republicans and Democrats are more divided along
ideological lines -- and partisan antipathy is deeper and more extensive -- than
at any point in the last two decades.''

The report continued:

''The overall share of Americans who express consistently conservative or
consistently liberal opinions has doubled over the past two decades from 10
percent to 21 percent. And ideological thinking is now much more closely aligned
with partisanship than in the past. As a result, ideological overlap between the
two parties has diminished: Today, 92 percent of Republicans are to the right of
the median Democrat, and 94 percent of Democrats are to the left of the median
Republican.''

This is not to suggest that there is absolute parity in our polarization. As the
report makes clear, while 27 percent of Democrats see the Republican Party as a
threat to the nation's well-being, 36 percent of Republicans see the Democratic
Party as a threat. Conservatives were also more likely to say that it was
important to live in places where people shared their political views.
Additionally, conservatives were more likely to say they would be unhappy if a
close relative married a Democrat than were liberals to say they would be
unhappy to have a Republican in-law.

This phenomenon coincides, to a certain degree, with the rise of talk radio and
the stridently ideological cable news -- profit-driven provocateurs whose
livelihoods ride on their abilities to rouse rabble, stir passions and diabolize
opponents.

And many of their listeners, viewers and readers become the apostles of passion,
enforcing rigid binary ideologies that accommodate little subtlety. Any seeming
equivocation is deemed evidence of apostasy. This, in itself, is dangerous.

Our politics are now strung with tripwires of hypersensitivities and
micro-aggressions. Every position is assumed to have a sinister subtext, made
all the more complicated by the fact that some actually do have such subtexts.

The phenomenon, more recently, is epitomized by views about President Obama,
which, depending on which silo one is in, either read as blind allegiance or
blind hatred. This robs him of the glory of his legitimate achievements and
artificially shields his missteps.

To be fair, his presidency, in many ways, has been hamstrung by opposition. In
the wake of his ascension came the rise of the Tea Party, the incredible
assertion by the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, that conservatives'
top priority should be to keep Obama from being re-elected (that didn't work out
so well), the stunning assault on voter rights, the influx of conservative
billionaires like the Koch brothers into the political arena, blatant
gerrymandering after the last census and the unprecedented levels of obstruction
by Republicans in Congress.

Still, there are real and legitimate debates to be had about the size and role
of government, how to grow and expand the economy, how to help the least
fortunate in the short and long term, how to position America militarily in the
world as the last remaining superpower, how to protect -- or expand the
recognition of -- the right of the individual, especially when those individuals
are members of minority groups, while respecting the democratic desires of the
majority of our citizens.

We must wrestle with these each in its own turn.

There are some moral issues on which there can be no ambiguity. For instance,
people cannot be treated differently because of the way they were born,
developed or identify; women must have access to the full range of reproductive
options; and something must be done about the continued carnage of gun violence
in this country.

There are other areas, however -- the continued existence of the detention
center at Guant√°namo Bay, the use of drones, government surveillance -- that
require critical, nonpartisan examination, regardless of who is in charge, in
part because many of these policies overlap Republican and Democratic
administrations.

We must continuously audit our allegiances, not only to keep adversaries at bay,
but also to keep allies loyal and true, and to understand that our friends and
our rivals aren't necessarily discrete and oppositional on every issue.
Loyalties too freely given and too uncritically maintained become fertile ground
for -- and, in fact, issue license for -- the corruption of conscience and the
betrayal of principle.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/16/opinion/charles-blow-politics-grow-more-partis
an-than-ever.html

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CHARTS: Guess Who's Not Coming to Dinner: Percentage of the
''consistently conservative'' saying they would be unhappy if a family member
were to marry
 Percentage of the ''consistently  liberal'' saying they  would be unhappy  if a
family member  were to marry (Source: Pew Research Center poll  of 10,013 adults
conducted Jan. 23 - March 16, 2014.)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


