                             1325 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Frog, a Prince Awaits

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE ULRICH

SECTION: Section AU; Column 0; Automobiles; BEHIND THE WHEEL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1293 words


If a building contractor arrived on time, performed heroically and charged a
fair price -- this is a New York fantasy, stay with me -- would you complain
that he wasn't good-looking? Would you refuse to hire him if he didn't come with
a fashionable tool belt?

That disconnect between looks and performance sums up the Honda Fit, which has
been variously described as dorky, frumpy, a doorstop and -- cover the
children's ears -- a minivan. But don't feel sorry for the Fit. By exceeding
customer expectations for a budget-friendly subcompact, Honda's hatchback has
forged a near-consensus as the one that most deserves your business.

To keep it that way, Honda has redesigned the Fit for 2015. The new car is more
powerful, yet consumes less fuel. It's a smidgen shorter on the outside, yet
carves out even more passenger space from an already efficient cabin. Honda says
it has added some $1,000 to $1,800 of features to the 2015 model, while keeping
the price virtually the same.

That sounds like a recipe for continued success, even if Honda's chefs are
serving up a Mexican dish. Fits sold in the United States are now coming from an
assembly plant in Celaya, Mexico. The move is saving Honda money, and that is
reflected in its hold-the-line pricing: $16,315 to start for the Fit LX with a
6-speed manual transmission, just $100 more than the 2013 version, the last
model offered.

The move may also help Honda sell more of the cars: American demand had
sometimes outstripped supply, with a single Japanese plant having to meet global
demand for the Fit (or the Honda Jazz, as it's called overseas).

The midprice EX is likely to continue to be the most popular version, starting
at $18,225. As with the LX, an extra $800 buys Honda's latest fuel-saver, a
continuously variable automatic transmission. A 6-speed manual is offered,
replacing the previous 5-speed unit.

I tested a Fit EX-L, a new leather-clad $20,590 version; an optional navigation
system lifted the sticker price to $21,590.

More than ever, the Fit is ridiculously well suited to city living. It seats
four adults, swallows plenty of gear, parks almost anywhere, sips fuel, has
excellent outward visibility, dices traffic and loves to get out of Dodge for
weekend adventures.

The redesigned model still won't win beauty prizes -- the Ford Fiesta, Hyundai
Accent and Chevrolet Sonic are all more attractive, in my book -- but the Fit
does look more attractive than before.

Slimmed-down horizontal headlamps flow naturally into a new gloss-black grille,
rather than being shoved awkwardly up the stubby hood. High-rise LED taillamps
frame the hatch. A concave slash of metal runs along the doors, as though a
sharp talon had raked the sides.

The new version is 1.6 inches shorter than the previous model over all. But
because partly of a wheelbase 1.2 inches longer, the Honda adds an eye-opening
4.8 inches of additional rear legroom, giving it more than the midsize Honda
Accord. Even six-foot-plus adults will have few complaints back there. The
trade-off is 8 percent less hatch space when the rear seat is down. Still, the
Fit holds nearly 53 cubic feet of goods when the back seat is folded, on par
with some small S.U.V.s.

That enormous hold is aided by Honda's split-folding Magic Seat; its one-touch
operation pivots the rear seat cushions forward to create a fully flat cargo
floor. The secret to that abracadabra packaging is a flat fuel tank under the
floor beneath the front seats, rather than the conventional placement toward the
rear. For anyone apprehensive about sitting atop the fuel supply, Honda says the
tank is as impervious to crash damage as any rear-mounted unit.

In recent Honda fashion, the interior styling is somewhat nondescript,
especially for a car aimed at young and first-time buyers. The gauges wouldn't
look out of place in, well, a minivan.

But the fit and finish seem excellent for the price, with softer, richer
materials replacing hard plastics. And the Fit ladles on features: All models
get Bluetooth connections and a backup camera. My EX-L test car also had heated
front seats, a moonroof, push-button start and LaneWatch, which presents a
high-resolution camera image of the car's right-hand blind spot.

But if the Fit's sophisticated performance and packaging are enough to counter
any doubts about the styling, there's no free pass for Honda's audio and
navigation interfaces, which have degenerated into some of the industry's most
overengineered, underwhelming units.

The new Display Audio screen does some things well. Like a smartphone, it
responds to finger gestures like pinch-and-spread to zoom in or out. Through
HondaLink, the central screen can manage iPhone apps, including travel, weather,
Aha, Pandora or a phone-based navigation system. (Android compatibility is
coming, but Honda can't say when.)

But those screen controls are mainly tiny slivers and tinier icons that proved
maddeningly difficult to pin down in a moving, bouncing car. Worse, the volume
knob has been replaced by obtuse flush-mounted switches.

Using the system was such a sad exercise in coordination and spatial logic that
I felt I deserved a food pellet each time I successfully pecked the screen. I
resorted to anchoring a thumb and three fingers on the screen frame while using
an index finger to manage the functions.

Yes, there's a redundant volume switch and basic audio controls on the steering
wheel, along with voice commands. But why bother to offer a touch screen that
seems designed to elude your touch?

The consolation is the pleasure of driving the Fit, a constant reminder of what
Honda can still do very well: Making Everyman cars that feel like more expensive
machines.

The new chassis is lighter yet more rigid, and new suspension geometry and rear
dampers improve the Fit's already excellent confidence and stability.

Power jumps to 130 horsepower, from 117, from a 1.5-liter 4-cylinder that's been
reworked with direct injection and variable valve control.

While some small cars feel less confident as speeds climb, the Fit is the
opposite: Straight-line stability is outstanding, even in strong crosswinds. And
when the road begins to curve, the frisky Honda takes full advantage.

Drivers who prize the Fit's direct steering and cheeky handling may want to
amplify those qualities with the manual transmission. That's because the Fit has
adopted a continuously variable transmission, or C.V.T., as the only automatic
available. A C.V.T. replaces stepped gears -- the familiar first, second, third
and so on -- with a belt-and-pulley system that operates in Drive and never
shifts. Instead, as in most hybrids, the C.V.T. constantly varies the
transmission ratio to maximize acceleration or fuel economy.

As C.V.T.s go, Honda's is among the best. The little 4-cylinder engine doesn't
rev and drone incessantly every time you pick up the pace. But there's still
that feeling of engine surge-and-release as the transmission translates commands
from your right foot into action.

Dropping the lever into Sport mode mimics the stepped gears of a conventional
automatic, but in the way that a wedding-hall band mimics the Beatles or
Beyonc√©.

The payoff is fuel economy that rivals any nonhybrid gasoline car in America.
The Fit LX, with less weight, an aerodynamic underbody and tires with low
rolling resistance, jumps a full 5 m.p.g. in the city, to 33, and 6 m.p.g. on
the highway, to 41, when equipped with the C.V.T., or 29/37 with the stick
shift.

The EX and EX-L models are rated 32/38 m.p.g. In my testing, the EX-L returned
an even better 41 m.p.g. on the highway.

And there you have it. The new Fit is an affordable, fun and ultraefficient
hatchback, with the expected reliability and strong resale value of a Honda.

Which only proves that looks aren't everything.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/15/automobiles/autoreviews/2015-honda-fit-review.
html

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The redesigned Honda Fit is being assembled in Mexico, a move
that should increase the supply, which has been tight. (AU1)
 FEATURE PRESENTATION:  Inside the Fit, richer materials have replaced hard
plastics. All versions get Bluetooth and a backup camera. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
AMERICAN HONDA) (AU4)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


