                             1338 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Answering a Cleric's Call, Iraqi Shiites Take Up Arms

BYLINE: By C. J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1537 words


BAGHDAD -- The long lines of Shiite fighters began marching through the capital
early Saturday morning. Some wore masks. One group had yellow and green suicide
explosives, which they said were live, strapped to their chests.

As their numbers grew, they swelled into a seemingly unending procession of
volunteers with rifles, machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades, backed by
mortar crews and gun and rocket trucks.

The Mahdi Army, the paramilitary force that once led a Shiite rebellion against
American troops here, was making its largest show of force since it suspended
fighting in 2008. This time, its fighters were raising arms against the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, the Qaeda splinter group that has driven
Iraq's security forces from parts of the country's north and west.

Chanting ''One, two, three, Mahdi!'' they implored their leader, the cleric
Moktada al-Sadr, to send them to battle.

''ISIS is not as strong as a finger against us,'' said one fighter, Said
Mustafa, who commanded a truck carrying four workshop-grade rockets -- each, he
said, packed with C4 explosive. ''If Moktada gives us the order, we will finish
ISIS in two days.''

Large sections of Baghdad and southern Iraq's Shiite heartland have been swept
up in a mass popular mobilization, energized by the fatwa of Grand Ayatollah Ali
al-Sistani urging able-bodied Iraqis to take up arms against Sunni extremists.
Shiite and mixed neighborhoods now brim with militias, who march under arms,
staff checkpoints and hold rallies to sign up more young men. Fighting raged in
northern and western Iraq on Saturday, with the Sunni insurgents making some
gains near a strategic border crossing with Syria.

The Mahdi Army rally in the Sadr City neighborhood of Baghdad on Saturday was
the largest and most impressive paramilitary display so far, but there were also
mass militia parades in other cities, including Najaf and Basra on Saturday, and
smaller rallies in Baghdad on Friday, equally motivated by what participants
described as patriotic and religious fervor.

Together, the militias constitute a patchwork of seasoned irregulars who once
resisted American occupation, Iranian proxies supported by Tehran, and pop-up
Shiite tribal fighting groups that are rushing young men to brief training
courses before sending them to fight beside the Iraqi Army against ISIS.

It is a mobilization fraught with passion, confusion and grave risk.

Militia members and their leaders insist they have taken up arms to defend their
government, protect holy places and keep their country from breaking up along
sectarian or ethnic lines. They have pledged to work alongside the Iraqi Army.

But as Iraq lurches toward sectarian war, the prominent role of Shiite-dominated
militias could also exacerbate sectarian tensions, hardening the sentiments that
have allowed the Sunni militants to succeed.

Moreover, some of the militias have dark histories that will make it hard for
them to garner national support. Some commanders have been linked to death
squads that carried out campaigns of kidnappings and killing against Sunnis,
including from hospitals.

Against this background, even as more armed men have appeared on the streets,
Shiite clerics have taken pains to cast the mobilization as a unity movement,
even if it has a mostly Shiite face.

''Our mission is to explain to the people what Ayatollah Sistani said,'' said
Sheikh Emad al-Gharagoli, after leading prayers Thursday afternoon at the
Maitham al-Tamar Mosque in Sadr City. ''He said, 'Do not make your own army,
this army does not belong to the Shia. It belongs to all of Iraq. It is for the
Shia, the Sunni, the Kurds and the Christians.' ''

The clerics have also said the mobilization will be temporary, that the militias
will be disbanded once the ISIS threat subsides.

But given the swift gains by ISIS and the lax performance of the Iraqi Army,
analysts do not expect the infusion of Shiite militias to quickly turn the tide.
And as the militias focus on establishing themselves, their leaders face a host
of daunting practical matters intended to convert a religious call to a coherent
fighting force.

Sheikh Haidar al-Maliki, who is organizing fighters of the Bani Malik tribe in
Baghdad, said he had been in constant consultation with the government to ensure
that the tribe's call-up ran efficiently.

He has been seeking letters from the army that volunteers can show their
employers to protect their jobs while they are fighting, and asking for uniforms
and weapons for the few men who have not appeared with their own. He said he was
also asking for government-issued identification cards, so that as thousands of
armed men head to and from battle, it might be possible to know who is who at
checkpoints along the way.

The Bani Malik militia is new. The tribe's volunteers, at one registration
rally, showed up with mismatched weapons and uniforms. Many of the weapons were
dated. Some were in disrepair.

Nonetheless, Sheikh Maliki said, in a week, he had already sent hundreds of
young men to military bases, where they are trained for a few days before
shipping out to provinces where the army has been fighting ISIS.

''We do it step by step,'' he said. ''But we work very quickly.''

His militias had already fought in Mosul and near Baquba, he said. On Thursday,
the first of its members died of battle wounds.

Other young men have been lining up to replace the fallen.

Ahmed al-Maliki, 23, a business-management student, said he had begun military
training more than a month ago, in anticipation that ISIS's campaign would grow.

His training, even before Ayatollah Sistani's June 13 call to arms, pointed to
what Sheikh Maliki said was the Shiite tribes' realization early this year,
after ISIS seized Falluja, that they needed to prepare for clashes with Sunni
extremists.

The recent call-up, he said, was a public step that invigorated a body of
quieter work already well underway.

The Bani Malik tribe had organized volunteers into 25-man units, each led by an
active-duty Iraqi soldier who had been training them in weapons, small-unit
tactics and communications.

Ahmed al-Maliki said he had never served in the army, and did not fight as a
militant during the American occupation from 2003 to 2011.

But in the preparatory system that his tribe had organized this spring, he had
learned to use a Kalashnikov that his family owned and other weapons under the
instruction of Mustafa al-Maliki, a three-year Iraqi Army veteran.

''I don't have any experience in the army,'' Ahmed said. ''But I can serve my
country and do as Ayatollah Sistani says.''

For the Mahdi Army, the mobilization has not been a matter of creating a
militia, but of preparing fighters for battle again.

Many of its members marching on Friday and Saturday had combat experience. They
appeared in uniforms and with many newer weapons, typically in a better state of
cleanliness and repair.

One member, who gave only a first name, Ahmed, said he had been with the Mahdi
Army since 2004, and fought many times.

A Mahdi Army leader, Hakim al-Zamili, a member of Iraq's Parliament who was
accused of organizing death squads when he served as Iraq's deputy health
minister, appeared with a Mahdi unit on Friday evening and said that he intended
to fight ISIS personally.

Mr. Zamili had been captured and held by American forces, and was released only
after an Iraqi government trial on terrorism charges stalled after witnesses did
not appear. He suggested that experienced militias would prove more nimble than
Iraq's conventional army.

''Why do the terrorists win battles against the Iraqi Army?'' he asked.
''Because the army is afraid to do what it must. They don't have the right
leadership.''

''The Army waits for orders,'' he continued. ''But the militias will do it
quickly. We can seize a place and then give it to the army.''

A Mahdi fighter, who declined to give his name, framed it another way. ''There
is a difference between army fighting and street fighting,'' he said. ''We are
street fighters.''

On one point the militias have been firm: In interviews throughout the past
week, clerics and fighters for different groups said they did not want American
ground forces in Iraq again, even to fight ISIS.

Some of the militias said they would, however, welcome other forms of military
aid, and did not oppose President Obama's commitment to send military advisers
to Baghdad.

''We need mat√©riel, and guns, and intelligence, or drones,'' Sheikh Maliki said.

The sheikh said Iraq would also need Washington's political and diplomatic help,
in particular to try to sever ISIS's foreign support, including, he said, from
donors in Persian Gulf states and Turkey.

''If America helps us in these ways,'' he said, ''we can stop them.''

Deep divisions remain between many Shiite tribes and militias, which have
competed for resources, power and standing, and had varied relations with Iran
and attitudes toward the West. At the Mahdi rollout on Saturday, fighters burned
Israeli and American flags, along with the black banner of ISIS.

For now, Sheikh Maliki and Mr. Zamili said, the militias have set aside most of
their disagreements to face a common foe.

''We have differences,'' Mr. Zamili said. ''But in front of our enemies, we are
one.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/22/world/middleeast/iraq-militia.html

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A Mahdi Army rally in the Sadr City neighborhood of Baghdad on
Saturday. (A1)
 A Mahdi Army rally in Baghdad's Sadr City drew tens of thousands of Shiite
fighters Saturday. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


