                             1312 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 2, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Amazon Absorbing Price Fight Punches

BYLINE: By DAVID CARR.

Email: carr@nytimes.com; Twitter: @carr2n

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; THE MEDIA EQUATION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1284 words


Books, we are told, are relics that have reached their sell-by date, put out by
an industry that is a desiccated shell of its former self.

Someone forgot to tell the book business that it was dead. Last Thursday
afternoon, I walked over to the Javits Center in Manhattan, where a throng of
people had gathered for BookExpo America, the industry's annual campfire -- so
many people that I wondered if there was a free whiskey concession. But no, the
place was jammed with books -- literary fiction, young adult, cooking,
spiritual, wellness -- and with the people who write and sell them.

The immense space was brimming with a surprising amount of optimism: After years
of downward spiral, the industry seems to have found some kind of equilibrium.

It has also watched with a mix of giddiness and anxiety as the Hachette Book
Group, one of the big Manhattan publishers, has taken on Amazon in a bitter
dispute over pricing. Hachette is suffering big losses because Amazon is
delaying delivery of Hachette titles while also eliminating discounts. (Its
authors are getting clobbered in the process.) Amazon is taking a reputational
hit for not putting its customers first, which has long been its guiding
philosophy.

Hachette is the first big publisher to enter talks with Amazon since the last
round of negotiations, and book people have rejoiced watching the bully get sand
-- a heap of negative press -- kicked in his face.

Amazon, beloved by Wall Street (until recently) and its customers for putting
growth and low prices ahead of profits, is getting a bit of an image makeover
right now, and the results have not been pretty.

On one level, this is just one corporate giant fighting with another -- Hachette
is owned by Lagard√®re of France -- over the share of e-book profits. So why the
fuss? The answer is that books are different from the thousands of other
products Amazon sells.

As the uproar grows, Amazon is learning that while it may own the publishing
industry with a 40 percent market share of all new books sold, according to
Publishers Weekly, it doesn't own the debate. By blocking inventory, Amazon has
become the less-than-everything store. Books may be a small fraction of what it
sells, but books are precious, troves of speech, not just products for commerce.
They were also the linchpin of the company's early march to retail dominance.
The symbolism is profound.

Amazon, a public company with very private tendencies, has not come to its own
defense by engaging in a public debate, instead choosing to drop a post into one
of its forums. ''When we negotiate with suppliers, we are doing so on behalf of
customers,'' it wrote last week. ''Negotiating for acceptable terms is an
essential business practice that is critical to keeping service and value high
for customers in the medium and long term.'' In other words, nothing special
going on here.

The response among publishers has been more expansive, and a lot more emotional.
Speaking at BookExpo on Thursday morning, James Patterson, the author who
composes about one out of 17 hardcover books bought in the United States, all
but called for lanterns and pitchforks.

''If Amazon's not a monopoly, it's the beginning of one,'' he said as he
accepted an award from independent booksellers. ''If this is to be the new
American way, this has to be changed, by law if necessary.''

Actually, the last time the government took an interest in the book industry, it
was the publishers that ended up in the hot seat, forced to settle after they
were accused of colluding with Apple on the price of e-books. But Amazon's stark
exercise of market power over Hachette -- going so far as to recommend other
books at lower prices on Hachette author pages -- has enraged the literary
community and may put the regulatory focus back on the Seattle-based behemoth.

''This situation is rife with antitrust risk'' for Amazon, William MacLeod,
chairman of the antitrust and competition practice group at the Washington firm
Kelley Drye, told my colleague David Streitfeld.

The government usually takes an interest when monopolies result in higher, not
lower, prices, so the real risk for Amazon may be the dent in its vaunted
reputation.

Amazon, like so many other digital giants (Apple, Facebook, Microsoft), mostly
refuses to engage in a debate about its tactics. It's especially odd for a
couple of reasons. Amazon was, for years, a darling in the news media, held up
as an example of an enterprise that bent the world through new thinking. But as
the company matured and its back story became more complicated, its labor and
business practices drew sharp criticism and the company all but ceased talking
to the news media.

That approach is all the more awkward now that Jeffrey Bezos, the founder of
Amazon, is also the owner of The Washington Post, which he bought last summer.
The Post has covered the dispute, but gotten no further than the rest of us in
its search for comment. ''Amazon, whose chief executive, Jeffrey P. Bezos, owns
The Washington Post, would not comment for this article,'' read one paragraph in
a report. So much for the free flow of information.

Writing for Reuters, Jack Shafer said: ''If Amazon thinks I don't care about its
silence, it's wrong. I take it personally that the company doesn't think it owes
me even a half-baked explanation for why I can't buy some books from it.'' He's
so put off by Amazon's taciturn approach that he will boycott the company. (Mr.
Shafer wrote his column before Amazon issued its statement, but he said via
email that he was underwhelmed by that gesture.)

I'd do anything I could to support Mr. Shafer -- except what he is doing. When I
am finished with this column, I will press a button and a wireless printer will
kick out a copy. I recently got that printer for under $100 including delivery
-- two days after I ordered it -- because I am a member of Amazon Prime. It
wasn't delivered by drone, but it may as well have been. It seemed to appear
like magic.

And there's the rub. Amazon's messaging to the public depends not on what it
says, but on what it does so well. Will consumers hooked on pricing and
convenience care that it will take them weeks to receive a copy of ''The Skin
Collector,'' a Hachette title by Jeffery Deaver? Mr. Deaver, a best-selling
author, certainly does.

''The book industry is fragile, and Amazon has so much power,'' Mr. Deaver said
after an appearance at BookExpo. ''I will be probably be fine because I have a
fan base, but what about authors on Hachette who have a first book coming out
and this is their one chance?''

Sitting against a wall at the Javits Center after his own appearances, Hugh
Howey wasn't so sure. A self-published author who has found big sales on Amazon
for his ''Wool'' series, he had spent time in a booth with 11 other
self-published authors who had sold 20 million books among them. (When you think
about it, they may be a bigger threat to the publishers than Amazon's pricing,
but I digress.)

''They both have a share of the blame,'' he said. ''But if publishers don't like
the terms, they are free to pull their books off of Amazon, although I think the
first one of them to break ranks and really partner with Amazon is going to wipe
out the rest of the industry.''

Still, he understands the uproar. ''If we were talking about the amount that
Sony charges for TVs, no one would say anything. TVs don't have the emotional
significance that books do.''

Regulators may or may not take an interest in the fight, but with four more big
publishers scheduled to enter negotiations with Amazon, the war in the news
media will continue. And curiously, the guy who owns the newspaper is letting
the publishers of big, printed tomes define the debate.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/02/business/media/amazon-absorbing-price-fight-pu
nches.html

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Amazon, run by Jeffrey Bezos, left, has gone so far as to
recommend ''Similar items at a lower price'' for books like ''The Skin
Collector.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD BRIAN/REUTERS) (B4)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


