                             1302 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Poe's Lost Lenore Lives in Song and Dance

BYLINE: By ANTHONY TOMMASINI

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; MUSIC
REVIEW; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 941 words


Last year, in announcing the inaugural NY Phil Biennial -- an 11-day festival of
contemporary music with 21 performances of 13 programs -- Alan Gilbert, the
music director of the New York Philharmonic, unabashedly invited comparisons
with similar events in the visual arts. Not just the Whitney Biennial in New
York, which focuses on American artists, but also the Venice Biennale, perhaps
the world's most prestigious showcase of international contemporary art.

There should be something like them in music, Mr. Gilbert asserted. Every other
year was the right frequency; New York was the obvious city. And the
Philharmonic was the ideal institution to anchor it, to be the principal
curator, along with partnering institutions like the Museum of Modern Art, the
Metropolitan Music of Art, the 92nd Street Y and the Orchestra of St. Luke's.

The NY Phil Biennial, which will present works by some 70 composers, ranging
from high school students to living masters, opened on Wednesday night. And it
said much about the festival's nature and scope that the first event was not a
Philharmonic concert, but an inventive production by the enterprising Gotham
Chamber Opera, in collaboration with the Gerald W. Lynch Theater at John Jay
College. The main feature was the American premiere of ''The Raven,'' a
monodrama for mezzo-soprano and 12 instruments by the Japanese composer Toshio
Hosokawa, in the first of three performances.

At 58, Mr. Hosokawa has long been a major figure in Japan and an influential
presence in Europe. He has had less exposure in America. ''The Raven'' takes its
text from Edgar Allan Poe's well-known narrative poem about a man in despair
over the loss of his lover, Lenore; he is visited, or so it seems, by a
mysterious raven that answers all of his perplexed questions with an enigmatic
''Nevermore.''

Mr. Hosokawa's engrossing 44-minute score sets Poe's poem to vocal lines that
vary from intoned speech to quasi-sung declamation to lyrically alluring flights
to bursts of soaring intensity. The instrumental music is atmospheric and
organic, with Impressionist colorings, pungently atonal harmonic writing,
spectral textures and Asian-influenced melodic fragments.

For this presentation, the director and choreographer Luca Veggetti turns the
monologue into a staged work for the compelling mezzo-soprano Fredrika
Brillembourg and the renowned, and riveting, dancer Alessandra Ferri. Poe's
narrator, never named, tells his story in chilling, haunting detail. But is the
raven appearing in the present? Is the narrator delusional? Is he descending in
the moment into near madness? Or telling us about it?

Mr. Veggetti honors the ambiguity of the poem by treating the two performers as
sides of a single person. That the music is sung by a mezzo-soprano intriguingly
ameliorates the gender-specificity of the narrator.

In this staging, Ms. Brillembourg and Ms. Ferri are similarly costumed (by Peter
Speliopoulos) in dark, grayish slacks and shirts, with silken black hair and
ponytails. As the work opens, Ms. Brillembourg sits on the front edge of a
platform, her knees against her chest, her head resting on her arms, lost in
thought. Ms. Ferri is curled up nearby.

Soon the two performers interact, and the staging becomes like a dance. While
singing this daunting work, Ms. Brillembourg entwines her limbs in stylized
positions with Ms. Ferri's, whose balletic gestures express the inner grief and
fears of the narrator. At times, Ms. Brillembourg even balances Ms. Ferri across
her knees or on her back.

In opening up Mr. Hosokawa's monodrama, Mr. Veggetti calls attention to the one
problematic element of the score. Poe's long poem is written in incessantly
rhymed, rhythmically repetitive, alliterative lines that are meant to lull you,
to numb you, in a way, into the desired state of mystery and fear: ''Deep into
that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing,/Doubting, dreaming
dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before.''

The lines almost demand to be read in a subdued drone, which is what Mr.
Hosokawa does during too many stretches of his vocal setting. Inevitably, this
creates some ponderous moments. I wish that now and then the singer would break
into patter, or skittish bursts that match the instruments -- which include a
sultry saxophone and a reedy clarinet -- especially in the vivid, atmospheric
performance conducted by Neal Goren.

Still, the music, over all, is intricate, distinctive and, at its best,
genuinely frightening. The staging offers a showcase for two impressive artists,
especially the vocally plush, dramatically courageous Ms. Brillembourg.

This 60-minute program, with no intermission, opened with a performance of a
1924 instrumental work inspired by a Poe tale, ''Conte Fantastique: Le Masque de
la Mort Rouge'' (''The Masque of the Red Death''), by the French composer Andr√©
Caplet, who was a colleague of Debussy's. Scored for harp and string quartet,
the piece loosely depicts the story of a prince hosting a masquerade ball who is
visited by a mysterious figure that turns out to be not a person, but a fatal
plague.

The score recalls Debussy and nicely conveys the oblivious ball guests, dancing
to swirling, waltzing music, spiked with ominous undercurrents. It is vividly
performed by members of the Gotham Chamber Opera Orchestra, including the
excellent harpist Sivan Magen.

Judging by the enthusiastic audience that filled the hall, the first NY Phil
Biennial is off to an encouraging start.

''The Raven'' is repeated on Friday and Saturday nights at the Gerald W. Lynch
Theater, John Jay College, 524 West 59th Street, Clinton; 212-875-5656,
nyphil.org/biennial.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/30/arts/music/ny-phil-biennial-opens-with-the-rav
en.html

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Raven, at the Gerald W. Lynch Theater, with the singer
Fredrika Brillembourg, on floor, and the dancer Alessandra Ferri. (C1)
  Neal Goren conducts with, from left onstage, Fredrika Brillembourg and
Alessandra Ferri. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RICHARD TERMINE) (C4)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


