                             1471 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 20, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On TV Saturday

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 711 words


7 P.M. (HBO) THE SECRET LIFE OF WALTER MITTY (2013) Ben Stiller, who also
directed this adaptation of the James Thurber short story, stars as Walter, a
dutiful drone in the photography department of Life magazine who finds himself
on a caper far beyond his wildest imagination when the negative for the
publication's final print edition goes missing. Kristen Wiig plays the
crinkly-nosed co-worker on whom Walter has a crush; Adam Scott is the leader of
the new tech-jerk bosses who have Walter's job on the line. And Sean Penn is the
mysterious photographer behind Walter's travels to Iceland, Afghanistan and
other stunning far-off places. ''Though it is a celebration of modesty, there is
also quite a lot of vanity in 'The Secret Life of Walter Mitty,' '' A. O. Scott
wrote in The New York Times.

There is also a contradiction: ''An ordinary fellow should not have to be quite
so special to win our admiration. And this version of Walter Mitty undermines
some of the democratic whimsy that has made his story such an appealing and
durable modern myth. He used to be one of us: a self-deluded dreamer charmed by
his unruly creative powers, a willing prisoner of his appetite for escapism. But
now our identification gives way to envy, and he is another one of those
enchanted people the rest of us can only dream of becoming.'' The movie is
followed at 9 by ''On the Run Tour: Beyonc√© and Jay Z,'' a concert special
filmed on Sept. 12 and 13 at the Stade de France, near Paris, featuring
performances of more than 40 songs during the couple's only stop outside North
America on the tour.

10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY David Tereshchuk reports on the
efforts of Robin Reineke, an anthropologist, to identify the remains of
immigrants who died while journeying through the Arizona desert.

NOON (13) RICHARD HEFFNER'S OPEN MIND Alexander Heffner interviews Paul
Rieckhoff, the chief executive and founder of Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of
America, who presents his plan to rid the Department of Veteran Affairs of
corruption, improve the care of service members and reduce the suicide rate
among veterans.

8 P.M. (Lifetime) THE ASSAULT (2014) After being sexually assaulted by members
of the high school football team, a cheerleader (Makenzie Vega) is subjected to
public shaming while trying to piece together a night she cannot remember.

8 P.M. (13, 49) THE ROOSEVELTS: AN INTIMATE HISTORY ''A Strong and Active Faith
(1944-1962),'' the conclusion to Ken Burns's documentary series, picks up with
the election of Franklin D. Roosevelt (the voice of Edward Herrmann) to his
fourth term in 1944 and his death in April 1945. It also follows the life of the
widowed Eleanor (Meryl Streep), a skilled political negotiator and champion of
civil rights, until her death in November 1962.

9 P.M. (CNN) WHITEY: UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. JAMES J. BULGER (2014) Joe
Berlinger traverses the life and crimes of Mr. Bulger, the South Boston mob boss
and longtime fugitive who at one point was second only to Osama bin Laden on the
F.B.I.'s Most Wanted list and was convicted last year of 11 brutal murders. This
documentary also uses Mr. Bulger's 2013 trial to examine corruption within the
American legal system, focusing on evidence that he may have worked as an F.B.I.
informant and that law enforcement agencies helped cover up his crimes. The
survivors of Mr. Bulger's victims despise him, ''but they are also angry at the
government and at what they see as the prosecution's attempt to minimize the
extent of the F.B.I.'s involvement with Mr. Bulger,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The
Times. ''Many journalists who covered Mr. Bulger for years feel the same way.''

10 P.M. (Fox News) GRETA INVESTIGATES: ISIS Greta Van Susteren reports on Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi, the head of the Islamic State (also known as ISIS or ISIL);
the group's use of social media; and its recruiting methods in the United
States.

What's Streaming Now

BLADE MAN A tortured video game executive (Lee Dong-wook) suddenly develops
supernatural powers: His anger and heartbreak result in knives sprouting from
his body, leaving him covered in scars in this South Korean television series.
Shin Se-kyung plays the beautiful game developer with a heart of gold who helps
heal his wounds. (dramafever.com)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/20/arts/television/whats-on-tv-saturday.html

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY 20TH CENTURY FOX
 MAR VISTA ENTERTAINMENT)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


