                             1466 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 15, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A '60s Femme Fatale of Rock Reincarnated

BYLINE: By CHARLES ISHERWOOD

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; THEATER REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 876 words


The dark eyes, peering from just under a fringe of blond bangs, wander the room
before seeming to fix on some odd vision. The mind, too, tends to flit freely,
moving from cogent reminiscence to random non sequitur like a needle skipping
across a record. And the voice, a husky, German-accented drawl that seems to
sigh with every syllable, suggests some serious inner disengagement with the
world, or maybe just disgust with it.

In her remarkable -- and howlingly funny -- portrayal of Nico, the 1960s
chanteuse and muse to musical greats of the time, the singer and performance
artist Tammy Faye Starlite is both vividly present and somehow barely there.
''Nico: Underground,'' at Theater for the New City, resurrects both the title
character and some of the zonked-out mood of the psychedelic era. Although Ms.
Starlite can only pretend to smoke a cigarette in the basement space in which
the show is staged, I began to feel I was inhaling fumes from something
stronger, or had somehow been transported back to the late 1960s, when Nico was
in her mythic prime.

The show ostensibly takes place much later. Written by T. D. Lang (a.k.a. Ms.
Starlite) and directed by Michael Schiralli, it's a blend of concert, with Ms.
Starlite performing a dozen songs closely associated with Nico, and a
fictionalized version of a radio interview from Melbourne in 1986, just a few
years before Nico's death. (The text is primarily drawn from that interview, as
well as several others, with some poetic license taken.)

Things start bumpily, as the unnamed interviewer, played with admirable finesse
by Jeff Ward, must remind Nico what she's doing. ''Is that my camera?'' she asks
imperiously. Um, no: We are on the radio here. But the exchange hardly gets much
easier, as Nico keeps wandering off topic, or ignoring the questions, lapsing
into moody silence, or tossing out gnomic reflections that are often hilarious.

''Liza Minnelli can't keep her mouth shut,'' she huffs at one point, apropos of
Lord knows what, although huffing requires more energy than this studiously
languid lady can muster. As the interviewer tries to keep her on track, he leads
her through the phases of her life and career: upbringing in Germany; film
appearances, including in ''La Dolce Vita,'' which she colorfully derides as
''just a codified defecation masquerading as nihilism''; stint with the Velvet
Underground and passage through the Andy Warhol ''superstar'' factory; later
years recording her own songs.

As the famous names crop up, Ms. Starlite drifts away from the radio studio
(actually just a table with a couple of microphones; this is a no-frills
production) and moves over to a standing mike to sing. Behind her is a five-man
band that capably mimics the arrangements on the recordings.

Ms. Starlite's voice is arguably richer and rangier than Nico's was, which gives
her the ability to evoke the performer at various stages of her career. It has a
bright, youthful sheen on Gordon Lightfoot's ''I'm Not Sayin,' '' her jangly and
upbeat first single. On the tracks she sings from the Velvet Underground's debut
album -- ''All Tomorrow's Parties,'' ''Femme Fatale'' and ''I'll Be Your
Mirror'' -- the more familiar sultry and slightly spaced-out drone kicks in. Why
did she only record those three songs? Lou Reed ''never really liked me because
of what my people did to his people,'' she says.

Although its creators' affection for the woman is never in question, the show
also gently parodies her disaffected persona. When it comes to discussion of
''Chelsea Girls,'' from her solo album, the tone leaps amusingly into burlesque.
''Oh the flute! My God!'' Nico wails histrionically. Her distaste for the
arrangement takes physical form, as she assaults the flute player, tussling with
him as she yanks the hated instrument from his hands.

Superb though Ms. Starlite's renderings of Nico's distinctive vocalizing is, I
have to confess I was just as engaged by her deadpan presentation of her
rambling responses to her interviewer's questions. (Mr. Ward is terrific in the
role.) The aper√ßus range from the merely odd (''So many black children sing
nowadays'') to the grimly philosophical (''Your only home is your pine box, and
the only direction is down''), to the seriously loopy (blithely insisting that
Bob Dylan was ''too prolific, Goebbels was the same way'').

I was never particularly fond of Nico's singing, and despite Ms. Starlite's
spot-on interpretations of her repertoire, I'm not likely to be going on a
downloading binge. But you don't really have to be much of a fan to get a trippy
kick out of ''Nico: Underground.'' The loving resurrection of her peculiar
personality alone makes for a funny, morbidly fascinating night of theater.

Nico

Underground

By T. D. Lang; directed by Michael Schiralli; lighting by Jason Jung; sound by
Craig Hoek; music direction by Ms. Lang. Presented by La Purcelle Productions in
association with Theater for the New City, Crystal Field, co-founder and
artistic director; production manager, Mark Marcante. Theater for the New City,
155 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village, 212-868-4444,
theaterforthenewcity.net. Through Sept. 28. Running time: 1 hour 15 minutes.

WITH: Tammy Faye Starlite (Nico) and Jeff Ward (The Interviewer).

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/15/theater/nico-underground-starring-tammy-faye-s
tarlite.html

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Tammy Faye Starlite performs a dozen songs as Nico, at Theater
for the New City.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHELLE V. AGINS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


