                             1470 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 19, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spare Times: For Children

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 4347 words


New York on Location

Ever want to meet the best boy, even though you suspect you already have him at
home? Or learn the job of a gaffer, which does not (at least not intentionally)
involve making mistakes?

Sunday you'll have your chance, when New York on Location, a huge festival
devoted to moviemaking, comes to Astoria, Queens. Presented by the Museum of the
Moving Image, Theatrical Teamsters Local 817 and Kaufman Astoria Studios, this
celebration will honor what goes on behind the camera even more than what
happens in front of it.

''If people are expecting glamour, they'll probably get just the opposite, but
it will be all that much more exciting and entertaining,'' said Carl Goodman,
the museum's executive director.

The festival, first held seven years ago, went on hiatus during the renovation
and expansion of the museum and the Kaufman studios. Now that those projects are
over, the organizers have revived and broadened the event, which will include
the museum (free all day), the surrounding streets and the studios' recently
opened back lot.

Don't be surprised to see fistfights and hapless souls tumbling from rooftops:
Those are just stunt performers (above, at the 2007 festival) exhibiting their
skill. You may also encounter a sudden downpour in the middle of a sunny block.
''Hopefully, our real weather will cooperate,'' Mr. Goodman said, ''but our fake
weather will be out of control,'' with special-effects experts delivering
''rain, snow and wind.''

Fairgoers can enter more than 20 movie trucks and trailers, all arriving from
films currently shooting in New York. ''The movie-star trailer is the most
tricked-up,'' Mr. Goodman said, hastening to add, ''Brad Pitt will not be in
there'' (or any of his peers). He declined to name in advance any of the
productions participating, noting that the event emphasizes crews, not
celebrities.

For young festivalgoers, the experience will go way beyond face painting.
Hairstylists and makeup artists will apply ''everything from the glamour look to
cuts and bruises,'' Mr. Goodman said. Camera, prop and wardrobe specialists will
demonstrate their jobs; camera cars will show how scenes are shot in moving
vehicles; so-called treat trucks will sell set-worthy snacks; and honeywagons --
mobile bathrooms used on location -- will be plentiful.

As Mr. Goodman put it, ''Even the act of going to the restroom is an authentic
film experience.''

(From 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., at the museum, 35th Avenue at 37th Street, and the back
lot, 36th Street between 34th and 35th Avenues, 718-777-6888,
movingimage.us/nyonlocation; free. Rain date, Sept. 28.) LAUREL GRAEBER

For Children

'Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces' (Friday,
and Sunday through Tuesday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer
like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the
adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in
analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out
the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel.
This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the
Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume.
From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays. (Closed this Thursday for
Rosh Hashana.) 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200,
thejewishmuseum.org. Free with admission: $15; $12 for 65+; $7.50 for students;
free for under 18 and members; pay what you wish on Thursdays from 5 to 8 p.m.

'Around the World in 80 Minutes' (Saturday and Sunday) Slovenia, Japan,
Australia, Brazil -- those are just some of the countries to be visited in this
whirlwind global tour, whose mode of travel is television. Presented by the
Paley Center for Media through Sept. 28, this festival of short films and
programming includes an episode of ''Knyacki,'' a Japanese Claymation show about
an earthworm; a comic adventure involving hypnosis from ''Round the Twist,'' an
Australian children's series; and ''Chunga Chui'' (''Leopard Beware''), an East
African tale about a herdsman and a leopard from Aardman Animations in Britain.
From 12:10 to 2 p.m., 25 West 52nd Street, Manhattan, 212-621-6800,
paleycenter.org; $10; $8 for students; $5 for under 14; free for members.

'Bessie's Big Shot' (Saturday and Sunday) If a cow can jump over the moon, why
can't she fly on a trapeze? In this production at the Swedish Cottage Marionette
Theater, closing this weekend, the title character, a cow, longs to join the
circus. Based on a show that used to tour on the City Parks Foundation
PuppetMobile, this theatrical adventure, by Douglas Strich, Alexander Bartenieff
and Bruce Cannon, follows Bessie as she follows her dreams. At 1 p.m., 79th
Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org.
Performances are $10; $7 for under 12. Reservations required.

Brooklyn Book Festival (Sunday) Everyone seems to be going to the Brooklyn Book
Festival, even Waldo, whom children will be invited to search for in the form of
five cutouts scattered throughout the fair. (Those who find him will have their
names entered in a drawing for ''Where's Waldo?'' prize packs.) Many living,
breathing literary figures will be around, too, like the authors Jon Scieszka,
Jill Santopolo and Lenore Look, discussing their work (''It's Elementary!,''
noon at the Youth Pavilion); R. L. Stine sharing his blend of horror and humor
(''Anything for a Laugh,'' 11 a.m. at the Youth Pavilion); and the company
Troupe and a variety of authors reading books aloud all day (10 a.m. at the
Children's Area). Many other events, for readers from preschool through
adolescence, are also planned. Full schedule and map are on the website. From 10
a.m. to 6 p.m., rain or shine, Brooklyn Borough Hall and surrounding outdoor
areas, 209 Joralemon Street, Downtown Brooklyn, brooklynbookfestival.org/youth;
free.

'The Butterfly Girl' (Saturday and Sunday) Based on Alan Madison's book ''Velma
Gratch and the Way Cool Butterfly,'' this breezy musical revival from Vital
Theater Company opens the troupe's 2014-15 season. Also incorporating a way cool
science lesson, the show follows the adventures of Velma, whose entry into first
grade is complicated by the near-perfect reputations of her older sisters.
Michelle Elliott and Danny Larsen wrote the musical, which investigates what
happens when something does single out Velma: the monarch butterfly that lights
on her finger during a class trip and won't leave. (Through Nov. 16.) At 11 a.m.
and 1 p.m., McGinn/Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, fourth floor,
212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org; $30; $40 for premium seats.

Children's Museum of the Arts Free Art Island Outpost (Saturday and Sunday) This
island fun doesn't require a flight to distant shores. The Children's Museum of
the Arts has been offering another summer of weekend workshops on Governors
Island, exploring a variety of crafts and materials. The theme this season is
''Dreamscapes,'' with projects in visual arts, theater games and filmmaking, all
devoted to fantasy and adventure. (Through Sept. 28.) From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.,
outside Buildings 11 and 14; Nolan Park, Governors Island, 212-274-0986,
cmany.org/schoolsandcommunity/free-summer-programs; free.

'City Splash' (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Summer in
New York can feel like a concrete oven, but there's water, water everywhere in
this annual installation at the Children's Museum of Manhattan. Open during
regular museum hours (weather permitting), ''City Splash'' invites little
visitors to explore water and its properties. Activities include investigating
bubbles; digging through ice for fossil reproductions; experimenting with
buoyancy; and making music from containers filled with varying levels of water.
(Through September.) From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; until 7 p.m. on Saturdays; open
until 8 p.m. the first Friday of every month; Sussman Environmental Center, the
Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org. Free with
admission: $11; $7 for 65+; free for members and under 1.

Field Station: Dinosaurs (Saturday, Sunday and Thursday) It's not unusual to see
giants in the Meadowlands, but some of those attracting visitors to that area of
New Jersey these days don't wear helmets or play football. At Field Station:
Dinosaurs, the 20-acre park filled with more than 30 animatronic prehistoric
creatures -- including a Tyrannosaurus rex, a stegosaurus and a 90-foot-long
Argentinosaurus -- the dinosaurs move when approached, and the
three-quarter-mile trail offers other paleontology exhibits and a mock fossil
dig. The park's programs and shows now include a 23-minute 3-D movie,
''Dinosaurs Alive!,'' about dinosaur hunting in Mongolia and New Mexico.
(Through Nov. 2.) From 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., 1 Dinosaur Way (off Exit 15X of the
New Jersey Turnpike), Laurel Hill Park, Secaucus, N.J., 855-999-9010,
fieldstationdinosaurs.com. In advance, $20 to $35 (different prices include
different perks); $17.50 to $30 for ages 3 through 11. At the box office, $25 to
$40; $20 to $35 for children. Free for 2 and under. (Movie admission is $5 if
bought separately.)

Film Forum Jr.: 'The Bank Dick' (Sunday) This series from Film Forum, intended
to introduce children to classic movies, will also introduce them this weekend
to classic performers: W. C. Fields and Buster Keaton. Fields stars as the title
character in ''The Bank Dick,'' a 1940 comedy in which he portrays a hapless
bumbler who has the good fortune to trip a bank robber and to find himself being
made a security guard. It will be screened with ''Cops,'' a 1922 silent short in
which Keaton takes on most of the Los Angeles Police Department. At 11 a.m.,
Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Avenue of the Americas, South
Village, 212-727-8110, filmforum.org; $7.50.

'The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation' (Friday through Sunday)
Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion
but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers.
The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son
Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.'s for the production. Audience members may
even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at
7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; New
World Stages, 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200,
gazillionbubbleshow.com; $55 to $75; lap seats for ages 2 and under are $20,
cash only, at the box office. V.I.P. seats, including a toy and other perks, are
$99.50.

'Go Fish' (Saturday) Fishing can be a lot of fun, unless you happen to be a
fish. These events from the Battery Park City Parks Conservancy turn the
experience into a win-win situation. Master anglers will help children cast
lines with barbless hooks into New York Bay, and all fish will be placed in
tanks and identified and observed before heading back to their homes. The day
will also include drop-in fish-related art projects; a bird-watching walk at 11
a.m.; and a 12:30 p.m. performance by the children's music duo Key Wilde and Mr.
Clarke. From 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., Robert F. Wagner Jr. Park, Battery Park City
(access at Battery Place), Lower Manhattan, 212-267-9700, bpcparks.org; free.

'Great White Shark' (Friday through Thursday) Seeing this new Imax film at the
American Museum of Natural History may inspire fear -- not for the safety of
humans, but for that of sharks. Shown in both 2-D and 3-D, this documentary
explores the fate of great white sharks, which have been driven to the brink of
extinction by the market for shark fin soup. Filmed in waters off Mexico, New
Zealand, South Africa and California, the work captures sharks in their
habitats, including a sequence in which great whites are shown breaching in 3-D.
Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30
p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. At Central Park West and 79th Street,
212-769-5200, amnh.org. Included in Museum Plus One admission (general admission
and one Imax film or special exhibition): $27; $22 for students and 60+; $16 for
ages 2 to 12. Member tickets: $13.50; $8.50 for children.

'Jazzed! The Changing Beat of 125th Street' (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday
through Thursday) Young visitors may want to put on their dancing shoes before
they visit this new show at the Children's Museum of Manhattan. Then again, on
certain days they can just wait and make a pair there. Presented in conjunction
with the National Jazz Museum in Harlem, this exhibition revisits the Harlem
Renaissance with displays dedicated to major jazz figures, highlighting Ella
Fitzgerald, Bill (Bojangles) Robinson and Duke Ellington. Activities include
song, dance, investigations of musical composition and craft workshops that
include, yes, building your own tap shoes. Live jazz performances are also a
regular part of the show. (Through Dec. 31.) From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; until 7
p.m. on Saturdays; open until 8 p.m. the first Friday of every month. Tisch
Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org. Free with admission:
$11; $7 for 65+; free for members and under 1.

'The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe' (Saturday) If the children of the
Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as
simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn't two hard-working actors be able to play them
and all the characters found there? That's what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her
husband, Rockford Sansom, who recently joined the cast, are attempting in the
Off Broadway Family Theater's first production, le Clanché du Rand's adaptation
of C. S. Lewis's classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) Saturdays at 11 a.m.,
St. Luke's Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200,
narniaoffbroadway.com; $35.

'The Love Note' (Sunday and Wednesday) Sound like a romance? Think again. The
title of this new production, billed as a musical for preteenagers, refers to
the words of encouragement the mother of the heroine, Jessie, packs into her
lunch every day. And Jessie needs all the support she can get: The new girl at
school, she has to deal with bullies, the pressures to be popular and the first
stirrings of a crush in this show by Gail Phaneuf. (Through Dec. 21.) At 10
a.m., Actors Temple Theater, 339 West 47th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200,
thelovenote.com; $24 to $39.50.

Mario the Magician (Sunday) Looking to create amusement as well as amazement,
Mario the Magician performs slapstick-inspired routines with an avian sidekick:
a dove named Mozzarella. He will engage the young audience in his act, geared to
ages 3 through 10 and influenced by classic comedians like Charlie Chaplin and
Buster Keaton. At 12:30 p.m., Drilling Company Theater, 236 West 78th Street,
third floor, Manhattan, 917-605-0662, mariothemagician.com; $20; $15 for 12 and
under.

Preservation Detectives: 'Chocolate Meltdown!' (Sunday) One of the wishes
expressed during Rosh Hashana, the Jewish New Year, is that the coming year will
be sweet. The Museum at Eldridge Street, the 1887 landmark synagogue where many
Jewish immigrants worshiped, will help assure that the coming holiday gets off
to a delicious start with this program, which inaugurates another season of
''Preservation Detectives'' tours in which children 4 to 12 view artifacts,
investigate neighborhood lore and sleuth their way into the past. Young
participants will make their own chocolate treats, create art, go on a scavenger
hunt and learn about another edible that plays a role in Rosh Hashana: carrots.
From 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., 12 Eldridge Street, between Canal and Division
Streets, Lower East Side, 212-219-0302, eldridgestreet.org/visit/family; $15 a
family. Reservations required.

Ready NY Kids Emergency Preparedness Festival (Sunday) Children see heroes
performing rescues in stories, TV and movies, but would they know how to help
themselves if a real emergency occurred? This fair on the East Meadow of the
Staten Island Children's Museum, sponsored partly by the New York City Office of
Emergency Management, will give young visitors advice on how to remain safe.
Activities will include investigating emergency vehicles and equipment,
experiencing a crawl-through smoke house (a simulated fire), meeting Police
Department horses, watching rescue demonstrations and learning how to create a
family evacuation plan. From noon to 5 p.m., Snug Harbor Cultural Center and
Botanical Garden, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, 718-273-2060,
sichildrensmuseum.org; free.

'Sleepy Hollow' (Saturday and Sunday) Ichabod Crane and the Headless Horseman
are off and riding again in this musical from Be Bold! Productions, revived for
the Halloween season. Inspired by Washington Irving's ''The Legend of Sleepy
Hollow'' and recommended for theatergoers older than 8, this show, by Michael
Sgouros and Brenda Bell, focuses on the love triangle and the mystery inherent
in Irving's tale. It also explores a darkness beyond the story's fearsome woods:
that of the human heart. (Through Nov. 9.) Saturday at 5 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m.,
Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village,
866-811-4111, hollowthemusical.com; $30 to $60.

'Somebody Come and Play: 45 Years of ''Sesame Street'' Helping Kids Grow
Smarter, Stronger, and Kinder' (Friday, Saturday, and Monday through Thursday)
Sesame Street now has an additional address: the New York Public Library for the
Performing Arts. This new show, which opened on Thursday, showcases more than
250 artifacts related to the beloved preschool public television series ''Sesame
Street,'' including set designs, original sketches for characters, scripts,
storyboards, animation cels, Claymation models, videos and, of course, over 20
Muppets, among them Elmo, Zoe and Bert and Ernie. A children's area includes
''Sesame Street'' books and activities. (Through Jan. 31.) Daily, except
Sundays, from noon to 6 p.m.; to 8 p.m. on Mondays and Thursdays; 111 Amsterdam
Avenue, at 65th Street, Lincoln Center, 917-275-6975, nypl.org/lpa; free.

Stories at the Statue of Hans Christian Andersen (Saturday) Not everything that
blooms perennially in Central Park is a flower or a tree. Storytelling also
returns there each summer, as the city's Parks and Recreation Department, the
Central Park Conservancy and the Hans Christian Andersen Storytelling Center
bring narrative performers to Andersen's statue every Saturday. The series, for
ages 6 and older, continues this Saturday with the Ugly Duckling's Birthday
Party, at which the duckling's tale will be told and the performer Rolf Stang
will portray Andersen. Cookies will be served. At 11 a.m., inside the park at
72nd Street and Fifth Avenue, rain or shine, hcastorycenter.org; free.

Tada! Youth Theater Open House (Saturday) Broadway dreams start early, and
Tada!, the youth musical theater troupe, offers classes for even nursery school
divas. The company, whose alumni include the actors Josh Peck and Kerry
Washington, will offer sample classes and question-and-answer sessions for tots
through 14-year-old students, with classes at 10 a.m. (ages 2 and 3); 10:45 a.m.
(ages 4 and 5); 11:30 a.m. (ages 6 through 8) and 12:15 p.m. (ages 9 through
14). From 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., Tada! Theater, 15 West 28th Street, third floor,
Manhattan, 212-252-1619, Ext. 4, tadatheater.com/forms/demoform.asp; free, but
space is limited, and reservations online or by phone are highly recommended.

'A Tale of Your City': Decorate Free School Supplies (Saturday) The Museum of
the City of New York is inviting children 6 to 12 to take a bit of their
favorite neighborhood with them every day when they go to school. In this
workshop, each young participant will receive a free pencil pouch to decorate
with a cherished city scene. For inspiration, budding artists can view the works
in ''Cityscapes: Highlights From the Permanent Collection,'' a show that
captures painters' views of New York more than a century ago. From 11 a.m. to 2
p.m., Fifth Avenue at 103rd Street, 212-534-1672, mcny.org. Free with suggested
museum admission: $10; $6 for students and 65+; $20 for families (with a maximum
of two adults); free for ages 12 and under.

Thalia Kids' Book Club: 'Pseudonymous Bosch: Bad Magic' and 'An Evening With
Patricia Polacco' (Sunday and Tuesday) Fall is just about here, and it's time to
turn over a new leaf -- or leaves. Many await young readers in the books to be
published this fall, and Symphony Space is celebrating those new volumes with
the return of its Thalia Kids' Book Club, which invites children's authors for
interviews and discussions with fans. The series gets underway this week with
two events. On Sunday at 1 p.m., Pseudonymous Bosch, author of the best seller
''The Name of This Book Is Secret'' (his name is secret, too) visits to discuss
his latest adventure series, ''Bad Magic,'' with his literary colleague Adam
Gidwitz and interested readers ages 9 to 12. On Tuesday at 6 p.m., ''An Evening
With Patricia Polacco'' will entertain younger bibliophiles as Ms. Polacco,
author and illustrator of ''Thank You, Mr. Falker'' and other picture books,
shares her insights with children 6 and older. At the Leonard Nimoy Thalia
Theater, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org; $15;
$12 for members.

'A Voyage Through Jewish History' (Sunday through Tuesday) This journey involves
not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the
Jewish Children's Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah's
tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along
the way include giving water to Rebecca's camels, playing the strings on David's
harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and
taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Usual hours: Mondays through Thursdays, 10
a.m. to 4 p.m.; until 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; closed this Wednesday and Thursday
for Rosh Hashana. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights,
Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum; $13; $10 for 65+; free for under 2.

'What's Up, Doc? The Animation Art of Chuck Jones' (Friday through Sunday, and
Wednesday and Thursday) A whole lot of great cartoons, that's what's up. Chuck
Jones (1912-2002), for many years one of the creative geniuses at Warner Bros.,
helped give life and indelible personalities to sassy characters like Bugs
Bunny, Daffy Duck, Wile E. Coyote, the Road Runner and many more. This new
exhibition at the Museum of the Moving Image salutes his artistry with sketches,
story boards, animation cels and photographs. Through Oct. 4, the Drop-In Moving
Image Studio each Saturday, from noon to 5 p.m., will feature ''Animation
Takeover,'' helping children older than 7 use Jones's ideas to create their own
projects, from flipbooks to short animated videos. And every Saturday and Sunday
during the show's run, at 1 p.m., the museum will present programs of Chuck
Jones screenings. This weekend offers '' 'Baton Bunny' and Other Cartoons,''
with selections from 1940 through 1994. (Through Jan. 19.) Hours: Fridays, 10:30
a.m. to 8 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 11:30 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Wednesdays and
Thursdays, 10:30 a.m. to 5 p.m.; 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens,
718-784-0077, movingimage.us. Free with admission: $12; $9 for ages 65+ and
students; $6 for 3 to 12; free for under 3 and members; free to all on Fridays
from 4 to 8 p.m., and free to all this Sunday, while the museum is presenting
the New York on Location festival. Screenings are first come first served,
though members can reserve seats by phone.

'Which Came First? The Chicken Museum' (Sunday, Wednesday and Thursday) A
chicken museum sounds like something only a child could dream up, and that's
indeed the case: Hiro Maddock Spiller wanted to go to one when he was 3.
Fortunately, his father, Harley Spiller, a.k.a. Inspector Collector, could help
make that dream come true. The result is ''Which Came First? The Chicken
Museum,'' a new show at the City Reliquary community museum organized by Mr.
Spiller and Hiro, who is now 6. The exhibition, which offers all manner of
things fowl -- including a wishbone collection -- opens this Sunday with a
reception from 2 to 5 p.m. and ''Chicken Tails,'' storytelling for children by
Micki Spiller, an artist who is Mr. Spiller's wife and Hiro's mother, from 3 to
4 p.m. The show runs through Nov. 30, Fridays through Sundays, and Wednesdays
and Thursdays, from noon to 6 p.m., 370 Metropolitan Avenue, near Havemeyer
Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-782-4842, cityreliquary.org/museum. Free
with suggested donation: $5 to $10.

World Maker Faire (Saturday and Sunday) The spelling may be old-fashioned, but
the ideas are all 21st century in this festival of do-it-yourself science. First
presented on the West Coast by Make Magazine, the fair is coming east again to
the New York Hall of Science, which will showcase hundreds of projects combining
craft and technology. This year's highlights include a Fly Zone, with hand-built
rockets, airplanes and drones; shows of shooting geysers made by combining Coke
Zero and Mentos; a 3-D Printing Village, a Fix It Village and a Lockpick
Village; how-to tech workshops; circus arts; and the ever-popular life-size
version of the Mousetrap game. Saturday from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Sunday from 10
a.m. to 6 p.m., 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens,
718-699-0005, nysci.org/event/world-maker-faire-2014. Advance tickets, available
online through Friday only: $32.50; $27.50 for ages 62+; $22.50 for students;
$17.50 for ages 2 to 17; free for under 2. At the door: $40, $35, $30 and $25.
Weekend passes, in advance: $60, $50, $40 and $30; at the door, $10 more. For
Sunday only, an all-day family pass of five tickets for $20 each is available
online only for entry to the fair between 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. All tickets include
museum admission, and members of the Hall of Science receive a 50 percent
discount. LAUREL GRAEBER

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/19/arts/spare-times-for-children-for-sept-19-25.h
tml

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY PATRICK ALVARADO/  MUSEUM OF THE MOVING IMAGE)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


