                             1477 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 23, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Feeling Our Rising Temperature

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL RICH.

Nathaniel Rich, a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine, is the
author of the novel ''Odds Against Tomorrow.''

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; BOOKS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1238 words


First, some cheerful news from the Future of Western Civilization Department:
Cliff swallows in the Great Plains are evolving to have shorter wings. This
helps them to swerve more easily away from speeding cars on the interstate.
''Over time,'' a behavioral ecologist at the University of Tulsa says, ''we've
begun to notice that we were seeing fewer dead birds on the roads.''

Stockholm's Central Station uses the body heat of railway travelers to warm a
nearby office building. The United States Navy is replacing its fleet of
military dolphins, trained to detect underwater mines, with robotic drones. A
new water bottle, inspired by the anatomy of a beetle in the Namibian desert,
condenses air moisture and refills itself. ''I'm enormously hopeful,'' writes
Diane Ackerman in the introduction to ''The Human Age: The World Shaped by
Us"(W. W. Norton; 352 pages; $27.95). ''Our new age, for all its sins, is laced
with invention.''

''The Human Age'' is an ode to the planet we've created for ourselves, a
book-length ''It's the End of the World as We Know It (and I Feel Fine).'' Ms.
Ackerman, who in many of her 20 books of poetry, memoir and narrative nonfiction
has written eloquently about the natural world, has now taken as her subject the
unnatural world.

It's a distinction without much of a difference. As the author acknowledges,
there is nothing ''natural'' about Earth in 2014. For more than three
millenniums, human civilization has reorganized nature to suit its tastes.
''It's as if aliens appeared with megamallets and laser chisels and started
resculpting every continent,'' she writes. ''We've turned the landscape into
another form of architecture; we've made the planet our sandbox.''

Ms. Ackerman leads us on a brisk tour of this sandbox and its crumbling sand
structures. There are pr√©cis on transcontinental green belts, de-extinction,
mariculture, nanotechnology, robotics and epigenetics, written in vivid,
exuberantly figurative prose. A solar power installation in the Mojave Desert is
''tens of thousands of mirrors'' shimmering in a ''flan of caramel light.''
Texas is ''so parched that it cracked all over like a callused heel.'' Exotic
species are ''accidental hobos'' and human beings ''are like witches, leaning
over the cauldron of the planet, stirring its creatures round and round.''
Double, double, toil and trouble.

But ''The Human Age'' is rarely grim, and the overwhelming spirit is one of
relentless optimism. It is telling that Ms. Ackerman's central image, of a young
orangutan at the Toronto Zoo playing on an iPad, is seen as cute, rather than a
perversion of nature. She describes the rapid rise in global temperatures as
merely a ''low-grade fever'' that ''won't be tragic everywhere and for every
species.''

''A warmer world won't be terrible for everyone,'' she says, ''and it's bound to
inspire new technologies and good surprises, not just tragedy.'' Greenland, for
instance, ''will have nice farmland,'' and milder winters will ''require less
heating, which saves on energy.'' Elsewhere Ms. Ackerman writes that ''there's
often little harm done by nudging plants and animals to new locales,'' adding
that she finds ''horses a wonderful addition to the North American landscape.''

She's right: There will be some cool new technologies. Horses are a nice
addition to our continent, and I do look forward to lower heating bills.

It is also possible that by the end of the century, the populations of Africa
and Australia will be wiped out, New York and most other coastal cities will be
accessible only to scuba divers, 70 percent of all species will go extinct, a
second Black Death will kill off half of Europe, 1.5 billion people will be
displaced around the world, and, as soon as 2050, the United States government
will declare martial law to prevent food riots. These, at least, are the
predictions made by Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway, two historians of science,
in their valuable ''The Collapse of Western Civilization: A View From the
Future'' (Columbia University Press; 104 pages; $9.95).

The authors characterize their little book as fiction, but it is not in any
conventional sense. It is an intellectual history of human awareness of our
precarious environmental condition, only the history continues into the future,
using estimates from climate scientists to imagine what will come.

The essay is written from the vantage point of 2093, and the simple act of
writing about the present in the past tense makes their account of our current
situation even more chilling than their imagined future. ''The consequences of
[our] actions were not only predictable but predicted,'' they write. ''The
people of Western civilization knew what was happening to them but were unable
to stop it. Knowledge did not translate into power.''

And why not? Why has our civilization been unable to take the most basic steps
to prevent a future that could include mass starvation, displacement and
pestilence?

The authors reach the same conclusion as the journalist Naomi Klein in her
robust new polemic, ''This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the Climate''
(Simon & Schuster; 576 pages; $30). Its thesis: ''We have not done the things
that are necessary to lower emissions because those things fundamentally
conflict with deregulated capitalism, the reigning ideology for the entire
period we have been struggling to find a way out of this crisis.'' Or, more
succinctly: ''Our economic system and our planetary system are at war.''
Something's got to give, and nature, as we've learned, is not in a giving mood.

Drawing on an impressive volume of research, Ms. Klein savages the idea that we
will be saved by new technologies or by an incremental shift away from fossil
fuels: Both approaches, she argues, are forms of denial. It will not surprise
those familiar with her previous books -- ''The Shock Doctrine,'' ''No Logo''
and ''Fences and Windows'' -- that her solution requires a radical
reconfiguration of our economic system.

She proposes a ''Great Transition,'' not only to sustainable sources of energy,
but also to a new mode of governance, marked by increased public spending,
investment in infrastructure, reduced workweeks, higher wages, universal health
care, rewriting campaign finance laws to eliminate corporate influence,
returning the management of utilities to the public sector and opening borders
to immigrants displaced by the effects of a warming climate. To pay for the
transition to a new economy, she lays out a series of taxes, mainly assessed on
the extremely rich. ''This Changes Everything'' reads like a campaign book for a
candidate who would have exactly zero chance of winning the American presidency.

Ms. Klein is aware of the intractability of the problems she describes, but she
manages optimism nonetheless. She celebrates some victories -- like the growing
divestment movement on college campuses -- and cites evidence that the vast
social movement she desires has already begun to emerge.

But change must come quickly. By 2023, she writes, we'll be lucky to restrict
the ultimate rise in global temperatures to an average of four degrees Celsius,
or seven Fahrenheit. Four degrees' warming, as it turns out, is the premise for
the nightmarish future described by Dr. Oreskes and Dr. Conway. This is why, of
the paths forward offered by these three very different books, ''The Collapse of
Western Civilization'' appears the one furthest from fiction.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/23/science/three-divergent-visions-of-our-future-
under-climate-change.html

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


