                             1493 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 2, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

What ISIS Could Teach the West

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 818 words


As we fight the Islamic State and other extremists, there's something that
President Obama and all of us can learn from them. For, in one sense, the
terrorists are fighting smarter than we are.

These extremists use arms to fight their battles in the short term, but, to hold
ground in the long run, they also combat Western education and women's
empowerment. They know that illiteracy, ignorance and oppression of women create
the petri dish in which extremism can flourish.

That's why the Islamic State kidnapped Samira Salih al-Nuaimi, a brave Iraqi
woman and human rights lawyer in Mosul, tortured her and publicly executed her
last week. That's why the Taliban shot Malala Yousafzai, then 15 years old,
after she campaigned for educating girls. And that's why Boko Haram kidnapped
hundreds of schoolgirls in northern Nigeria and announced that it would turn
them into slaves.

In each case, the extremists recognized a basic truth: Their greatest strategic
threat comes not from a drone but from a girl with a book. We need to recognize,
and act on, that truth as well.

For similar reasons, the financiers of extremism have invested heavily in
fundamentalist indoctrination. They have built Wahhabi madrassas in poor Muslim
countries like Pakistan, Niger and Mali, offering free meals, as well as
scholarships for the best students to study in the gulf.

Shouldn't we try to compete?

Shouldn't we use weapons in the short run, but try to gain strategic advantage
by focusing on education and on empowering women to build stable societies less
vulnerable to extremist manipulation?

The United States' airstrikes have slowed the advance of the Islamic State and
averted a genocide against the Yazidi population in Iraq, but it's very
difficult to win a war from the air. That's why the Taliban still thrives in
Afghanistan after 13 years of American air attacks.

Unfortunately, we're not playing the long game, as the extremists are. We are
vastly overrelying on the military toolbox and underemploying the education
toolbox, the women's empowerment toolbox, the communications toolbox. We're
tacticians; alas, the extremists may be better strategists.

It's not a question of resources, because bombs are more expensive than books.
The United States military campaign against the Islamic State, which is also
known as ISIS and ISIL, will cost at least $2.4 billion a year and perhaps many
times that, according to an estimate from the Center for Strategic and Budgetary
Assessments in Washington.

In contrast, Obama seems to have dropped his 2008 campaign promise to establish
a $2 billion global fund for education. And the United States gives the Global
Partnership for Education, a major multilateral effort, less in a year than what
we spend weekly in Syria and Iraq.

This is an area where Congress seems more forward-looking than the president
because Congress regularly appropriates substantially more for basic education
overseas than Obama requests. Bipartisan legislation, the Education for All Act,
would elevate the issue; let's hope that Obama gets behind it.

No one is na√Øve enough to think that education is a panacea. Al Qaeda leaders,
including Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahri, have been university educated.
Iraq, Syria and Lebanon were all reasonably well-educated and supportive of
gender equality by regional standards, yet all have been torn apart by civil
wars.

Still, the historical record of the last half-century is that education tends to
nurture a more cosmopolitan middle class and gives people a stake in the system.
In Hong Kong today, we're seeing how educated youth often behave. They are
demanding democracy, but peacefully.

Girls' education seems to have more impact than boys' education, partly because
educated women have markedly fewer children. The result is lower birthrates and
less of a youth bulge in the population, which highly correlates to civil
conflict.

I support judicious airstrikes in the short term against the Islamic State, but
that should be only one part of a policy combating extremism. And a starting
point should be to ensure that the three million Syrian refugees mostly in
Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon -- especially girls -- can get schooling. Right now,
many are getting none, and one study published last month found that Syria had
the worst reversal in educational attainment in recent history, with enrollment
rates for Syrian children in Lebanon less than half the level of those in
sub-Saharan Africa.

Yet the Unicef request for education funding for Syrians was only 40 percent
financed as of mid-August. If we miss this opportunity, those children will be
tinder for future wars and extremism, and we'll be stuck dropping bombs for
generations to come.

So let's learn from the extremists -- and from those brave girls themselves who
are willing to risk their lives in order to get an education. They all
understand the power of education, and we should, too.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/02/opinion/nicholas-kristof-what-isis-could-teach
-the-west.html

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


