                             1439 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 29, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Israeli App Tracking the Gaza Conflict Has Followers Near and Far

BYLINE: By JODI RUDOREN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1166 words


JERUSALEM -- Many Israelis and, especially, their supporters abroad, experienced
the intensity of this summer's long battle against Palestinian militants in the
Gaza Strip primarily the way they do so much of modern life: on their
smartphones. Every day of the fighting -- sometimes every hour or multiple times
a minute -- their phones flashed, or sounded a siren, signaling each of the more
than 4,200 rockets flying toward Israel from Gaza.

More than one million people have downloaded the free Red Alert app, most after
the beginning of Israel's military operation on July 8. Many kept wailing phones
by their bedside; the app disrupted business meetings and dinner parties,
synagogue services and, in one famous case that spurred more downloads, a live
television interview with Israel's ambassador to Washington.

''I just never turned it off,'' said Penelope Hogan, 47, a massage therapist who
lives in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn. ''I'd get one alert and then another and then
another, I noticed my heart was beating faster. It really gave me, not an
understanding, but an empathy, somewhat of a small understanding, what people
were living with.''

The app was developed during Israel's last conflict with Hamas, the militant
Islamist group that controls Gaza, in November 2012, as a tool for residents of
communities in southern Israel where most of the rockets were aimed. Ari Sprung,
a software engineer and one of its creators, said the idea was to make sure
people who might not hear the actual siren -- perhaps because they were driving
or had music turned up loud -- would know to get to a shelter.

During the recent battle, the app became a way for those far from the action to
monitor it in real time -- and a weapon in the raging propaganda war. Hooked
into the military home front's command system, Red Alert tells users when and
where a siren sounds. The English version offers a choice of eight ringtones,
including one that mimics the Hebrew call of ''tzeva adom,'' or color red,
actually heard in the south, two air-raid-type sirens, and what Mr. Sprung
described as calmer sounds, like an alarm clock, added after user complaints.

Danny Gewirtz, who lives outside Jerusalem, said that when the app went off
while he was taking a shower one morning, his wife thought it was an actual
siren and rushed into the safe room, waking their daughter and her fianc√©. ''It
almost ended my marriage right then and there,'' said Mr. Gewirtz, 53, who runs
an advertising company. (Afterward, his daughter changed the sound to a series
of beeps called ''News Flash.'')

Red Alert is the best known of several such smartphone apps, and there are also
a number of social-media feeds and web tools counting rockets fired or
intercepts by Israel's Iron Dome missile-defense system. Google Chrome users can
add a toolbar to their web browser that flashes red with each incoming rocket.

LifeUnderFire.com counts down 15 seconds, the last five flashing red and
accompanied by a siren, then says, ''For over 14 years, one million Israelis
have had 15 seconds to find shelter from Hamas' rocket attacks. What are you
able to do in 15 seconds?'' IsraelHasBeenRocketFreeFor.com is a countdown clock
of how many days, hours, minutes and seconds Israel has been rocket free for
(1:20:46:13 as of Thursday at 5 p.m. local time).

Aaron Friedman, the American-Israeli designer of the countdown clock, said his
website's name is long, ''but tells you exactly what to expect.'' It has drawn
more than 300,000 unique visitors, he said, since its launch July 18.

''I wanted to find a way to help others realize the frequency of these
attacks,'' explained Mr. Friedman, 29, who works with Mr. Sprung at Curiyo, a
Jerusalem company that curates web content. ''The idea of a simple one-off
website, a timer that counted up and reset back to zero after each rocket fired,
that might be eye-opening.''

Red Alert was originally available only in Hebrew. Ron Dermer, Israel's
ambassador to the United States, was one of about 80,000 subscribers, and it
went off on his phone during a congressional subcommittee hearing in March. Rep.
Mark Meadows, a Republican from North Carolina, asked afterward if he could get
the app in English, so Mr. Dermer contacted Kobi Snir, Mr. Sprung's
co-developer. Now, there are 240,000 users in the United States.

An African-American church in Stockton, Calif., connected the app to its sound
system one Sunday in July and did a mock evacuation in solidarity with Israel.
The Schusterman Family Foundation in Washington included downloading Red Alert
in a blog post suggesting actions supporters could take to ''Stand With
Israel.'' Haaretz, an Israeli daily newspaper, reported Thursday that a family
of French Jews used the app to prepare for the real sirens before moving this
summer to the southern Israeli city of Ashdod.

Jon Stewart had a field day with the app, noting that in Gaza, there are neither
sirens nor smartphone facsimiles, but what Israel calls a ''knock on the roof''
in the form of a drone-fired missile. ''So the Israeli military warns Gaza
residents of imminent bombing with a smaller warning bombing,'' Mr. Stewart said
on The Daily Show. ''An 'amuse boom,' if you will.''

Mr. Dermer, who has shown off the app on Capitol Hill and in meetings at the
White House, said news producers generally asked him to turn the app off or
ditch his phone during scores of television interviews this summer. But Bob
Schieffer, host of Face the Nation on CBS News, heard the app's siren during a
pre-interview phone conversation in the green room, and told him to leave it on.

Sure enough, an alert sounded during the interview, and the app showed the
rocket heading toward Gedera, which just happens to be where Mr. Dermer's mother
was born.

''I said, 'Bob, the chances of that happening are one in a million, that it
would go to Gedera, the one place in Israel that would have the most meaning to
me personally,' and he said, well, it really brought the point home,'' Mr.
Dermer recalled. ''It's not the same as reading in a newspaper that 100 rockets
were fired yesterday. Each one of them you're getting interrupted. All of a
sudden a siren is going off in your home. Hour after hour, day after day.
There's a different human response to it.''

Mr. Sprung, 34, who moved to Israel from Miami at age 10, said he has not made
any money from Red Alert, and that its Google-generated ads pay for server
space. During the conflict, he hooked it into Yo, an Israeli messaging app,
broadening access. As rockets reached all over Israel, he increased the number
of locations to 2,000 from 55.

He was interviewed about the app on Good Morning America, CNN, BBC and by a
journalist from Japan who said his country should have something similar
tracking missiles between North and South Korea.

Heading to bed Wednesday, a day after an open-ended cease-fire was secured
between Israel and Gaza, Mr. Sprung said he turned his phone off for the first
time in nearly two months.

''I slept much better,'' he said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/29/world/middleeast/an-israeli-app-tracking-the-g
aza-conflict-has-followers-near-and-far.html

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: In Ashkelon, Israel, on Sunday, a woman left the hairdresser's
chair to go to a nearby bomb shelter as sirens rang out. The Hebrew  call of
''tzeva adom,'' or color red, is what is heard by residents in southern Israel
in the event of an incoming attack. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM HOLLANDER/EUROPEAN
PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


