                             1450 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 7, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Camping Out With the Office

BYLINE: By MARISA MELTZER

SECTION: Section ST; Column 0; Style Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1734 words


In the hope of finding fellowship with other entrepreneurs, David Heath decided
to attend ''Summer Camp'' -- a three-day networking and music festival in
upstate New York hosted by WeWork, a company that rents shared office spaces. It
was late August, the beginning of the off-season for summer camps like the one
at which the event was held.

After a five-hour bus ride from New York City, Mr. Heath and the nearly 1,500
other people who attended Summer Camp found themselves in a wilderness expanse
spread out over 150 acres of tennis courts, pine trees and bare-bones wood
cabins on either side of Raquette Lake in the Adirondacks.

Mr. Heath, 31, is the co-founder of Bombas, a company that sells socks over the
Internet. It operates out of WeWork's co-office space near Madison Square Park
in Manhattan, which is just one of 19 the company operates in cities around the
country. As one of the event's sponsors -- he donated socks for the swag-filled
backpacks attendees received -- he was invited to come up on Thursday with
WeWork employees.

By Friday afternoon, he happily greeted a group of friends who were arriving. On
a ferry shuttling them between the girls camp and boys camp outposts, Mr. Heath
and his cohort could be seen plotting their weekend. There would be work,
perhaps. There would be play.

One friend, who wore a bandanna around his forehead and clutched a Super Soaker
water gun, declared to the crowd, ''If you don't want to see me naked, don't go
to camp.''

Another had turned his free camp T-shirt into a crop top and said, ''We're gonna
bro out so hard.''

For Mr. Heath, Camp was providing a different vibe than that which he
experiences elsewhere. ''When you are within the confines of the city or even
the Hamptons, you still have a certain level of internal restraint,'' he
explained.

While the image of technology sector neophytes was once signified by math geeks
and nerdy coders, the surge of business-school graduates and marketing majors
entering this professional stratum is changing the culture of the start-up
economy. Post-collegiate aspiring millionaires who once might have flocked to
junior analyst programs at Wall Street banks or law schools are now trying to
create -- or at least glom onto -- a Next Big Thing.

And because ambition never truly takes a vacation, the sounds of both industry
buzzwords and youthful chatter filled the air at Summer Camp. Overheard: ''I
want to start a hybrid incubator and rehab''; ''I have a bang straightener if
you need one''; ''You should come to my next UX meet-up''; ''I went from jock to
dork, it's very unusual''; ''Entrepreneurial creatives who are early adopters'';
''This is like a mini Burning Man!''; ''I told my office, 'Sorry guys I'm going
off the grid' ''; ''I said to him, 'Just chill out and kiss me.' ''

WeWork was founded in 2010 by Adam Neumann, 35, and Miguel McKelvey, 40. But the
grande dame of Summer Camp was Rebekah Paltrow Neumann, 36, WeWork's chief brand
officer and Mr. Neumann's wife. (She is also Gwyneth Paltrow's cousin.)

Ms. Neumann's relatives own the campground where the event has been held since
2012. As campers scampered to and from activities, she lazed in a rocking chair
and took in the scene. She pointed to a guy walking by.

''That's Yigal AzrouÃ«l, a famous fashion designer,'' she said. Dechen Thurman, a
yoga instructor and brother of Uma, she mentioned, had been up the night before.
''Those are the kind of people we happen to have in this community.''

The company, Ms. Neumann said, sees itself less as a landlord providing yoga
classes, reliable Wi-Fi and beer on tap to tenants and more as an architect of
''a community that empowers people everywhere to do what they love.''

Some attendees took a broad interpretation of Ms. Neumann's vision. Lisa
Markuson, 27, who works in sales and marketing, went to Summer Camp with a
simple agenda. ''My goal was to hook up with a stranger, and I actually hooked
up with two,'' she said. With that task attended to, she spent her final day
writing poetry on a typewriter on the beach with a group of friends who call
themselves the Haiku Guys.

The festival was not a revenue-generating event for WeWork. Admission started at
$375 for the three days and included sleeping accommodations, with some tents
arranged in groups bearing rapper-name designations like Wu-Tang Way and Biggie
Boulevard. The price also covered meals of cold cuts and beer as well as
transportation. Marijuana was not provided, though it was enjoyed in abundance.

Rather, Summer Camp is a perk WeWork offers for the 1,475 people who boarded the
buses in the pursuit of sharing business plans, networking and drinking shots.
It may best be described as Coachella meets Allen & Company's Sun Valley meets
''Meatballs.''

Despite a whole lot of drinking, attendees said they knew they got much more
than a bad hangover from attending. For instance, while wakeboarding, Mr. Heath
said that he met someone who runs a digital marketing agency he may call upon
professionally. ''It felt so much more organic than going to a conference,'' he
said. ''I shared something with this guy that went beyond business networking.
Now I feel like I know him on a personal level because we did some back flips
and shared some beers.''

Days at Summer Camp revolve around a loose schedule of events, lectures and
games, like a tug of war and a pie-eating contest.

General Assembly, the continuing education company, hosted a ''Spaghetti and
Marshmallow Innovation'' workshop in the boys' camp theater. At a nearby fire
pit, Michael Parrish DuDell, the writer of a book tied to ''Shark Tank,'' the
hit TV series, delivered a talk entitled, ''Putting the (Type) 'A' in
Achievement: How to Build a Framework for Success.'' Reddit sponsored an ''Arts
and Crafts Hackathon'' in the boys' camp theater. Tim Rowe, a representative
from UPS, led a workshop, ''Logistics for a Start-Up.''

Lew Frankfort, the executive chairman of Coach and a board member of WeWork,
gave a well-attended talk that included the advice to be ''relentless and
single-minded in whatever your quest is.'' As he concluded, someone asked,
''Lew, are you going to party with us?''

This demographic of Internet entrepreneurs -- driven and often well funded (by
parents and investors alike) -- is attractive to all sorts of brands, including
UPS, Early Growth Financial Services and Restoration Hardware, which helped
sponsor Summer Camp. Start-ups, small businesses and freelancers are the bread
and butter of WeWork, which has locations spread between cities like New York,
San Francisco, Boston, Seattle and Chicago. It rents business accommodations
ranging from an unassigned desk in a common area to office spaces, according to
the company. The idea is to create a community among a diffuse work force, which
may otherwise toil alone in city apartments or parents' basements.

As an additional benefit, some WeWork members end up collaborating with and
investing in one another's projects. Tenants include a matchmaking service
called A Little Nudge and a software company for medical scheduling called
Intrigma, as well as BuzzFeed and Airbnb, which use WeWork spaces as satellites
to their headquarters. In New York, WeWork charges $350 and up, depending on the
space (a six-person office space can be as much as $6,000 a month).

Camp was about offering the WeWork community a change of pace. There was neither
reliable cellphone service nor Wi-Fi. Instead, hookahs, vintage typewriters and
canoes loaded with beer were aplenty. It was not unusual to see a drone
overhead. At least one bear was spotted.

The scene was an ideal respite for WeWorkers and their friends -- not just from
working, but from weekending in the Hamptons.

''I'm sick of just going to the Hamptons, with the same people doing the same
things,'' said Margot Vitale, 23, a merchandising assistant at Saks Fifth
Avenue. She attended Summer Camp with her friend and University of Southern
California sorority sister Olivia White, 23, who runs a bedding company called
41 Winks out of WeWork's SoHo West offices. ''I'm planning on meeting my husband
here,'' Ms. Vitale said with a laugh.

Adrian Winn, 31, was wearing tattoos on his face and body and holding Super
Soakers filled with vodka and a brown Afro wig he wore on and off during Camp.
''I'm getting into as much trouble as humanly possible,'' said Mr. Winn, who was
a co-founder of a company called Aura Social Technologies and works out of the
WeWork offices on Fulton Street. ''I spend my weekends in Montauk trying to get
pretty girls to download my app.''

There were antidotes to revelry. On Saturday morning, several fitness classes
were offered: boot camp, CrossFit, yoga. Emily Brobeck, 32, a yoga instructor
who also works at an alternative asset management firm, wore a tank that read
''almond milk lattes'' and kept the practice on-brand. During the final pose,
savasana, she played a cover of Radiohead's ''Creep,'' which featured
prominently in the trailer for the movie ''The Social Network.''

The nights were dominated by live music, D.J.s and light shows. After dinner on
Saturday, the Brooklyn band St. Lucia performed. After sunset, Michael Franti &
Spearhead played songs about unity, and two women in shorts kissed as men around
them cheered. A woman dressed as a taco twerked with a man dressed as Sailor
Moon.

Not everyone was sold on the weekend. ''The crowd wasn't as techie as I was
hoping it would be,'' said Martha Denton, 38, the founder of the Presentation
School, which offers instruction on professional demonstrations and speeches.
''I tend to spend more time with people who are nerdier, more into innovation,
into edgier tech, edgier art, edgier music and edgier conference formats. I know
my people were there, since I met a few. But it felt like almost too much effort
to weed through the crowd to find more of them.''

Trevor Croop, 29, a strategist at Salesforce.com, had no such problems. This was
his third annual pilgrimage to Summer Camp, and this year he brought his wife.
They have an idea for a project involving a dance performance and an Xbox
Kinect. They came to Camp in search of collaborators, and found them: An
aspiring D.J. and makeup artist they met are eager to work with them.

But the best part, Mr. Croop said, is that though they accomplished a
professional goal, the vibe never felt overtly mercenary. ''I don't want to
network,'' he said. ''That's so vacuous.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/07/fashion/wework-goes-to-summer-camp.html

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: WeWork campers at a performance by the band St. Lucia. (ST1)
 At WeWork Summer Camp on Raquette Lake in the Adirondacks, there are water
sports, vintage typewriters and beer in abundance. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LAUREN
LANCASTER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ST8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


