                             1431 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 26, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Murray Overcomes Cramping to Prevail in His Opening Match

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER CLAREY

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Sports Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 997 words


Andy Murray now knows that he can serve at severely reduced speed and contort
himself into pained positions that bear more resemblance to modern dance than
modern tennis and still win a match at the United States Open.

There may be some comfort in that. Tennis, after all, is about points, not style
points. But what was far from reassuring for Murray, once a U.S. Open champion,
was that he was cramping and suffering (and muttering) against Robin Haase after
just two sets in this age of the men's tennis marathon.

''It's not the worst I have ever felt necessarily, but it's the worst I have
ever felt after an hour and a half of a tennis match,'' he said after his 6-3,
7-6 (6), 1-6, 7-5 victory.

Opening day was, to be sure, a scorcher at Flushing Meadows: bare,
sunscreen-lathered shoulders rubbing up against bare, sunscreen-lathered
shoulders in the vast walkways of the Open, which were soon crowded enough to
pass for Roland Garros amid the afternoon rush for the ice cream vendors and the
outside courts.

Inside Louis Armstrong Stadium, Judy Murray, Andy's mother and former coach,
brandished a fan decorated with the Scottish colors in the second row of the
stands.

Smelling salts or a blindfold might have come in handy, too, because there were
stretches of this strange-but-true match that had to be tough for a parent to
watch.

Three years ago, when Haase and Murray played here in the second round, Haase
won the first two sets before Murray recovered to win the next three. This time,
the eighth-seeded Murray looked like he had taken the memory and the lesson to
heart, winning the first two sets himself.

But that was when the trouble began in earnest: Murray, not one to mask his
frustrations, has played through all sorts of pain in his career, as when he
beat Jarkko Nieminen despite major back trouble at the French Open in 2012. But
Monday was a full-body breakdown: cramps in Murray's legs, cramps in his right
side, cramps in his left side, cramps in his right arm, cramps in his left arm,
cramps just about everywhere it seemed.

''For me it was unexpected, and therefore quite difficult mentally to deal
with,'' Murray said. ''Sometimes it can happen in one area of your body, but
when it starts to kind of go everywhere, you don't know exactly where it's going
to creep up next. When you stretch one muscle, something else then cramps,
too.''

It also was unexpected because Murray said he had trained particularly hard and
well in the lead-up to this tournament. He had felt good enough to declare
beforehand that this was the best prepared he had felt coming into a Grand Slam
tournament since Wimbledon last year (he won that Wimbledon, putting an end to a
77-year drought for British men in singles).

That was presumably no throwaway statement from a veteran like Murray, by now
quite adept at tapping the brakes on runaway expectations by understating his
own chances. ''I got a great training block over in Miami done, so physically
I'm where I would want to be,'' Murray said on Saturday. ''My body is pain-free,
which is good.''

Forty-eight hours later, his body was pain-wracked, which was clearly not good,
even if he did manage to hit a backhand return winner in mid-cramp in the fourth
set, which made for quite an unusual and acrobatic follow-through.

Haase, an attack-minded Dutch veteran, had problems of his own on Monday. He was
feeling nauseated and also had a foot injury.

''I was more busy with myself, and I was struggling myself,'' he said of
Murray's increasingly apparent problems. ''I tried to play my game, and it
didn't bother me what he did or what he felt.''

But Haase certainly was not expecting to win nine games in a row after losing
the opening game of the third set.

''It came out of nowhere for me, and I was surprised,'' he said.

Haase was also upset, complaining to the chair umpire after being rebuffed in
his effort to seek further treatment for his foot on court.

''I've never heard that before that a physio can deny a treatment,'' he said.
''We are here at a Grand Slam. What is that? He saw me and then he tells me that
a pill is enough. If I ask for treatment, I should get treatment, I think.''

Murray, who appeared to be in considerably more distress, never bothered to call
for a trainer, although he did clamor for plenty of ice on changeovers.

''I didn't think you were allowed treatment for cramps,'' he said. ''I mean, you
can get the trainer on and say it's something else, but it was pretty clear what
was happening. And at that stage, it was like, well, what does he come on and
treat? I mean, my quads, my forearms and my lats. One treatment, I don't think
he would have been able to help. You just try to get as much fluid and eat as
much as you can at the change of ends.''

Even more important, you avoid going to a fifth set. Haase led by 3-0 and 4-1 in
the fourth and missed a great chance to go up 5-2 when he blew two overheads.

But though Murray then surrendered his serve (or what was left of it) to allow
Haase to serve for the fourth at 5-3, the Scot then mustered just enough energy,
gumption and timely brilliance off the backhand wing to break Haas back. This
happened with considerable assistance from the clearly nervous Dutchman, who
double-faulted on break point.

Murray, playing in what looked like slow motion, still had plenty of work to do.
He still had to find a way to hold serve while hitting first serves at well
under 90 miles an hour. He still had to break Haase again to go up 6-5 and still
had to fight off three break points in the final game before Judy Murray and
Murray's new coach, the Frenchwoman Am√©lie Mauresmo, could jump to their feet
with relief. He will next face Matthias Bachinger of Germany.

It was an undeniably gutsy first-round victory, but it also was an undeniably
disquieting first-round victory.

''I don't know if it's something I have done in the last few days that's been
wrong or not,'' Murray said in his trademark baritone drone. ''But I need to try
and find out why.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/26/sports/tennis/andy-murray-overcomes-cramping-a
t-us-open-to-win-his-first-match.html

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Andy Murray during his four-set victory over Robin Haase. ''For
me it was unexpected, and therefore quite difficult mentally to deal with,'' he
said of his cramping. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BEN SOLOMON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B9)
 Andy Murray resting during a changeover in his match against Robin Haase.
Murray's cramping began in earnest after the first two sets, but he found a way
to win. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAMON WINTER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B10)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


