                             1498 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 5, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On TV Sunday

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section SP; Column 0; Sports Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 660 words


9 P.M. (Showtime) HOMELAND ''This should come as a relief: 'Homeland' is safe
without Sgt. Nicholas Brody,'' Alessandra Stanley wrote in The New York Times
about this Season 4 opener. The two-hour episode finds Carrie Mathison (Claire
Danes, above), now christened the Drone Queen, back in the field running
intelligence operations in Kabul and Islamabad while dealing with a bomb attack
on a terrorist that has killed dozens of civilians and a possible leak in the
C.I.A.'s counterterrorism operation. Saul Berenson (Mandy Patinkin), meanwhile,
has left the C.I.A. for a private security firm with Defense Department
contracts in the Middle East. And Peter Quinn (Rupert Friend) would like out,
too. But Carrie still wants him close to her.

10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, talks about Ebola in the United
States. Senator Kelly Ayotte, Republican of New Hampshire, and Dan Bongino, a
former Secret Service agent, discuss problems within the agency that led to the
resignation of its director, Julia Pierson. Dr. Fauci also appears on ''Face the
Nation,'' at 10:30 on CBS, along with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of
Israel.

6:30 P.M. (13) MOYERS & COMPANY William K. Black, a professor of law at the
University of Missouri-Kansas City, and the federal government's director of
litigation during the savings and loan crisis in the 1980s, speaks with Bill
Moyers about behavior by senior banking executives that he says led to the
financial crisis and the lack of government oversight.

7:30 P.M. (CBS) 60 MINUTES The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, speaks with
Scott Pelley about terrorism, cybercrime and other challenges confronting the
bureau. Lesley Stahl reports on doctors who are fighting the high cost of cancer
drugs. And Anderson Cooper visits with Chaser, who just may be the smartest dog
on earth.

8 P.M. (TCM) THE RED SHOES (1948) A famous ballerina (Moira Shearer, left) is
torn between art and love in this take on the Hans Christian Andersen fable
about a girl bewitched by her red dancing shoes. Writing in The New York Times,
Bosley Crowther called the film, directed by Michael Powell, ''a visual and
emotional comprehension of all the grace and rhythm and power of the ballet.''

8:30 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY A reporter threatens to publish confidential
documents leaked from inside the State Department, while Henry (Tim Daly) finds
himself immersed in international negotiations when Elizabeth (Téa Leoni) uses
him to broker a deal with Pakistan.

9 P.M. (13, 49) INSPECTOR LEWIS, SEASON 7: ENTRY WOUNDS A new season in this
''Masterpiece Mystery!'' production begins as James Hathaway (Laurence Fox,
left) takes on his first case -- one combining neurosurgery, blood sports and
animal rights -- as an inspector, with the help of his new partner, Detective
Sgt. Lizzie Maddox (Angela Griffin). Meanwhile, Detective Inspector Robert Lewis
(Kevin Whately), fidgety in his retirement, jumps at the chance to rejoin the
force when Chief Superintendent Jean Innocent (Rebecca Front) asks for his help.

9 P.M. (CUNY) WALLANDER: THE SECRET Inspector Kurt Wallander (Krister
Henriksson) must make sense of a suspect who doesn't seem to fit the crime --
and grapple with a dark secret from his own past -- when a boy's body is
discovered in an abandoned barn in the final installment of this series.

What's Streaming Now

SOFT IN THE HEAD (2014) After a violent breakup with her abusive boyfriend,
Natalia (Sheila Etxeberría), a 25-year-old alcoholic, finds herself bouncing
between a shelter and a friend's Orthodox Jewish family in this film directed by
Nathan Silver. ''From a dramatic standpoint, the movie can be unconvincing,''
Ben Kenigsberg wrote in The Times. ''Some half-muttered dialogue evokes John
Cassavetes at his most indulgent; Ms. Etxeberría's performance is both bravely
off-putting and irritatingly mannered.'' (vyerfilms.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCK

URL:

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOE ALBLAS/SHOWTIME)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


