                             1546 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             January 3, 2014 Friday
                                 Every Edition

You keep your resolutions; we'll keep your calendar full

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. T15

LENGTH: 2038 words


What are you looking forward to in 2014? A new workout regimen? A commitment to
charity? A plan to read more? You worry about keeping your resolutions; we'll
worry about keeping your calendar filled with fun things to do. Make note of
these big dates in January, February and March.

-Alex Baldinger, Fritz Hahn, Lavanya Ramanathan, Macy Freeman, Margaret Ely,
Maura Judkis, Michael O'Sullivan and Stephanie Merry

JANUARY

Jan. 10-Feb. 16

'THE TALLEST TREE IN THE FOREST'

Playwright and actor Daniel Beaty transforms into African American actor and
activist Paul Robeson for a solo theatrical production at Arena Stage. Through
14 musical numbers backed by a band, Beaty performs as more than 40 characters
from Robeson's life. Moises Kaufman, the Tony- and Emmy-award-nominated director
of "The Laramie Project" and "I Am My Own Wife," directs. Beaty will join
post-show discussions on Jan. 30 and Feb. 4. Arena Stage, 1101 Sixth St. SW
(Metro: Waterfront). 202-488-3300. www.arenastage.org. $40-$90.

Jan. 10-11

JIM GAFFIGAN

Jim Gaffigan has built a successful career by presenting himself as a PG-rated
Everyman who is perpetually bemused by such commonplace things as fast food,
fatherhood and being fat and lazy. His current tour (called, unsurprisingly
enough, "White Bread") will no doubt feature the doughy, pasty-skinned
Midwesterner's signature asides, in which he steps outside of himself to
critique his own performance, typically in the breathless, high-pitched voice of
a humorless crank. Part of the joke, of course, is that there's never anything
particularly shocking or offensive about Gaffigan's humor. At the same time, his
almost obsessive inspection of the ordinary frequently offers insights, along
with wicked belly laughs. At 7 and 9:30 p.m. Warner Theatre, 513 13th St. NW
(Metro: Metro Center). 202-783-4000. www.warnertheatredc.com. $37.75-$47.75.

Jan. 18

BAO BAO'S PUBLIC DEBUT

Since the August birth of the National Zoo's giant panda cub, the Panda
Cam-obsessed public has been desperately waiting for a chance to visit
Washington's bouncing, black-and-white bundle of joy. Bao Bao - whose name,
meaning "treasure," was selected by a public vote - is set to make her public
debut Jan. 18. No tickets are required; zoo visitors can see the youngest panda
on a first-come, first-served basis, though members of Friends of the National
Zoo will get to see her a bit earlier, with exclusive access to the panda
habitat Jan. 11-17. National Zoo, 3001 Connecticut Ave. NW (Metro: Woodley
Park). 202-633-4888. www.nationalzoo.si.edu.

Jan. 24-25

MONSTER JAM

Bicycles and tiny cars have become the polite vehicles of choice for navigating
the Washington streetscape. That's why there's something thrillingly escapist
about the epic rumble of rude, road-hogging, Mini Cooper-crushing monster
trucks. The Monster Jam gives such souped-up beasts as Grave Digger and Iron
Outlaw their due. On nothing less than 66-inch tires, they'll race each other
and fly through the sky during the freestyle rounds at Verizon Center. 601 F St.
NW (Metro: Gallery Place). 202-628-3200. www.verizoncenter.com. $20-$65.

Jan. 25

POLAR BEAR PLUNGE AND PLUNGEFEST

The new year is the perfect time to make a few resolutions. Start with being
more charitable, and also check off your desire to be more adventurous: At this
month's Maryland State Police Polar Bear Plunge, you can join the thousands of
brave, swimsuit-clad souls who will barrel into the frigid Chesapeake Bay to
raise money for the Special Olympics of Maryland. After you've returned to shore
- and feeling has returned to your extremities - celebrate your dual
accomplishments at the post-plunge party, complete with DJs and, yes, plenty of
hot chocolate. Sandy Point State Park, 1100 E. College Pkwy., Annapolis.
410-242-1515. www.plungemd.com. $75 minimum donation required.

FEBRUARY

Feb. 7-Sept. 7

'AMERICAN COOL'

To define cool, you might start by listing the names of those who have
contributed to popular culture through their artistic influence or charisma. Or,
you could just peruse the National Portrait Gallery's "American Cool," a
photographic exhibition of artists, musicians, actors and other cultural icons.
Those featured include Frank Sinatra, Madonna, Miles Davis and Billie Holiday.
The roster of photographers whose works are included isn't un-hip either: Carl
Van Vechten, Annie Leibovitz, Richard Avedon, Cass Bird and others. Eighth and F
streets NW (Metro: Gallery Place). 202-633-8300. www.npg.si.edu.

Feb. 10-March 9

'WE ARE PROUD TO PRESENT . . .'

The full title of Jackie Sibblies Drury's play may be difficult to remember -
"We Are Proud to Present a Presentation About the Herero of Namibia, Formerly
Known as South West Africa, From the German Sudwestafrika, Between the Years
1884-1915" - but critics found the production hard to forget when it played at
New York's Soho Rep in 2012. The play, which has its area debut at Woolly
Mammoth Theatre, examines latent prejudices through the story of six actors as
they struggle to rehearse a play about a genocide. 641 D St. NW (Metro: Archives
or Gallery Place). 202-393-3939. www.woollymammoth.net. $35-$67.50.

Feb. 11

THE BEATLES 50TH ANNIVERSARY CONCERT

On Feb. 11, 1964, days after their landmark appearance on the "Ed Sullivan
Show," the Beatles performed their first U.S. concert to 8,000 screaming fans at
the Washington Coliseum in Northeast. On the 50th anniversary of that concert,
the D.C. Preservation League and Douglas Development will re-create the
extraordinary 35-minute show song-for-song, minute-for-minute beginning at 8:31
p.m. This time, however, it'll be Beatles cover band Beatlemania Now plowing
through the historic setlist. Doors open at 6 p.m. Uline Arena, Third and M
streets NE (Metro: NoMa). www.beatlesyesterdayandtoday.com. $45-$100.

Feb. 12

'ROBOCOP'

Paul Verhoeven's 1987 thriller "RoboCop," about a police officer killed in the
line of duty who is turned into a cyborg crime fighter, was surprisingly
un-brain-dead for a popcorn movie, offering sharp social satire along with the
action. Maybe that's because it was the first English-language film for the
Dutch director, who brought an outsider's eye to a quintessentially American
genre. Brazilian filmmaker Jose Padilha, known for the 2007 Portuguese-language
crime drama "Elite Squad" and its 2010 sequel, might be the perfect guy to
direct the remake, which is said to draw connections between futuristic droid
police officers and present-day drone warfare. Visit
www.goingoutguide.com/movies for showtimes.

Feb. 18-23

'AMERICAN IDIOT'

The musical that married the odd couple of Green Day and Broadway is finally
making its way to Washington. The play, which took home Tony and Drama Desk
awards after its 2010 premiere, proved that strange combinations can work. The
story follows the coming-of-age of three guys, set to the tunes of "21 Guns" and
"Boulevard of Broken Dreams," among others. National Theatre, 1321 Pennsylvania
Ave. NW (Metro: Metro Center). 202-628-6161. www.thenationaldc.com. $48-$98.

Feb. 19-23

D.C. INDEPENDENT FILM FESTIVAL

More than 1,000 submissions have been whittled down to the best 60 films for the
D.C. Independent Film Festival, which highlights drama, documentary and student
work from around the world. But, more than just a place for movie buffs to
quench their thirst for quality films on a shoestring budget, the festival also
provides an opportunity for aspiring filmmakers to learn the craft. Seminars in
this year's festival will delve deep into the topics of crowdfunding and social
media. Visit www.dciff-indie.org for films and showtimes.

Feb. 21-March 8

ATLAS INTERSECTIONS FESTIVAL

Yes, the Intersections Festival has dance, music and theater, like any other
respectable Washington arts festival would. But Intersections has one thing the
others don't: a dog circus. "Mutts Gone Nuts" is one of the 60 acts, many of
which are free, that will be featured in Atlas Theatre's 16-day festival. If dog
tricks aren't your thing, catch performances from such artists as Jane Franklin
Dance Company, UrbanArias, Christylez Bacon and Mary Alouette. Atlas Performing
Arts Center, 1333 H St. NE (Metro: Union Station). 202-399-7993.
www.intersectionsdc.org. Prices vary.

Feb. 28

THE AVETT BROTHERS

Two brothers from North Carolina, eight studio albums and a plethora of musical
genres ranging from bluegrass to indie rock: The Avett Brothers are back on tour
to showcase their new album, "Magpie and the Dandelion." With Old Crow Medicine
Show at 8 p.m. Patriot Center, 4500 Patriot Cir., Fairfax.
www.patriotcenter.com. $39.50-$55.

MARCH

March 1

THE EAGLES

The Eagles have been playing farewell tours since at least 2004, and this is the
second "History of the Eagles" stop in Washington. Might this be the year the
classic rock group finally calls it quits? At 8 p.m. Verizon Center, 601 F St.
NW (Metro: Gallery Place). 202-628-3200. www.verizoncenter.com. $53-$188.

March 2-June 8

GARRY WINOGRAND

Photographer Garry Winogrand was one of the great mid-20th-century American
street photographers, chronicling the connections that unite us, as well as the
barriers (of sex, class, age and race) that sometimes divide us. At the time of
his 1984 death, he had left thousands of undeveloped negatives. Some of them
will appear in this retrospective, among the 190 or so works selected to
showcase Winogrand's sometimes satirical, always compassionate eye. National
Gallery of Art, West Building, Sixth Street and Constitution Avenue NW (Metro:
Smithsonian). 202-737-4215. www.nga.gov.

March 8

D.C. UNITED HOME OPENER

D.C. United's loud, loyal fans suffered through the most uneven season in its
history in 2013, as the team won only three of its 34 matches but also captured
the U.S. Open Cup. The offseason arrival of U.S. national team striker Eddie
Johnson and the return of defender Bobby Boswell, however, is raising hopes for
a better 2014, starting with this 7 p.m. match against the Columbus Crew. RFK
Stadium, 2400 East Capitol St. SE (Metro: Stadium-Armory). 202-587-5000.
www.dcunited.com. Prices to be announced.

March 10-30

WORLD STAGES: INTERNATIONAL THEATER FESTIVAL 2014

The Kennedy Center's Hall of Nations will be more than just a hall during the
month of March, when performance groups from 20 countries, including Iceland,
Chile and Iraq, will take to the theater's stages for the World Stages festival.
Highlights include "A Midsummer Night's Dream" from the British-South African
team behind "War Horse," and "Savannah Bay," from France's Theatre de l'Atelier,
starring Academy Award nominee Emmanuelle Riva ("Amour"). Kennedy Center, 2700 F
St. NW (Metro: Foggy Bottom). 202-467-4600. www.kennedy-center.org. Prices vary.

March 15

ROCK & ROLL MARATHON AND HALF-MARATHON

Brazilian drums at Mile 5, electronic dance at Mile 12, funk rock at Mile 20: If
the thought of running a marathon is daunting, this race might be for you. Bands
play on stages situated at every mile along the route, which begins on
Constitution Avenue and winds through Rock Creek Park before curling back toward
RFK Stadium and through Anacostia. Registration is open through March 9 or until
the race sells out. www.runrocknroll.competitor.com. $125-$145.

March 18-30

ENVIRONMENTAL FILM FESTIVAL IN THE NATION'S CAPITAL

As the District's development boom continues, environmental and sustainability
concerns become ever more visible, as they have throughout the industrialized
world. The annual Environmental Film Festival in the Nation's Capital is an
effort to raise awareness of such issues as extreme weather, climate change,
public transportation, agricultural practices and nuclear energy through more
than 160 films. Visit www.dcenvironmentalfilmfest.org for a list of film and
screening locations.

March 20-April 13

NATIONAL CHERRY BLOSSOM FESTIVAL

In 2012, peak bloom arrived two weeks earlier than normal. In 2013, it came
late. No word yet on when the blossoms are predicted to flourish in 2014, but
the opening ceremony (March 22), Blossom Kite Festival (March 29), fireworks on
the Southwest Waterfront (April 5) and Japanese street festival and parade
(April 12) are all set. One can only hope the pink flowers choose to show up on
time, too. 877-442-5666. www.nationalcherryblossomfestival.org.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


