                             1589 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                          February 26, 2014 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Dissenting votes from the Foreign Service?

BYLINE: Al Kamen

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 697 words


In an unusual move, the American Foreign Service Association, which represents
more than 16,000 career diplomats, is expected to weigh next week whether to
publicly oppose some of  President Obama 's controversial recent ambassadorial
nominations.

AFSA President  Bob Silverman , at a news conference Tuesday to discuss the
association's new guidelines for selecting ambassadors, said he would ask the
28-member board whether it wanted to take a formal position on three Obama
mega-bundler nominees:  Colleen Bell  (for Hungary),  George Tsunis  (Norway)
and  Noah Mamet  (Argentina). Bell and Tsunis were approved by the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee this month, though Tsunis got through on a
party-line vote of 12 to 6.

The nominees came under fire at their committee hearings in recent weeks after
displaying a lack of knowledge about the countries to which they had been
nominated.

AFSA has not often taken public stands on nominations. The one example cited -
Bill Clinton 's 1993 nomination of hotelier  Larry Lawrence to be ambassador to
Switzerland - was approved despite AFSA opposition. (Lawrence, Loop fans may
recall, died in Switzerland and was buried in Arlington National Cemetery as a
World War II Merchant Marine vet. His body was later disinterred when it was
found that he had never served.) And we're told there may have been instances of
behind-the-scenes opposition to some nominees as well.

Silverman didn't promise that AFSA would act on any of the nominations at the
March 5 board meeting, but he said, "I want to consult with the AFSA board . . .
we do have concerns . . . stay tuned." He noted that there may be a feeling that
AFSA might not "want to get into the middle of a dogfight" while it's in
progress.

Diversity milestones

 Jeh Johnson 's confirmation a couple of months ago as head of the Department of
Homeland Security may have marked one of the few times that the two top
officials in a Cabinet department were minorities.

The first time in the Obama administration was at Commerce in 2009, when  Gary
Locke , a Chinese American, was head of the agency and  Dennis Hightower , an
African American, was deputy secretary.

Johnson, who is African American, has joined Cuban American  Alejandro Mayorkas
, who had already taken over the deputy slot.

Meanwhile, if former Obama White House Cabinet secretary  Chris Lu , who is
Chinese American, is confirmed as deputy secretary at the Labor Department,
he'll be joining Secretary  Tom Perez , a Dominican American. So that would be
three. (We're hearing a fourth is in the works.)

Staying in bean-counting mode, however, we see that women are not to be found in
especially high numbers among deputy secretaries in the 15 statutory Cabinet
departments. (As opposed to the "Cabinet-rank" agencies and positions.)

So far, with four vacancies (at Education, Commerce, Transportation, and Housing
and Urban Development) and one nominee pending ( Sarah Bloom Raskin  at
Treasury), there are only two women serving as deputy secretaries:  Heather
Higginbottom  at the State Department and  Krysta Harden  at Agriculture.

A Singapore sing

When your economy is a bit shaky and your military in a bit of a budget squeeze,
there's always what Harvard political scientist  Joe Nye called "soft power."

Nye was talking about extending U.S. influence around the world not through
drones or bribes but through the lure of American culture and values.

Kind of like when the State Department sent jazz legend  Dave Brubeck  to Poland
in 1958 to loosen the commie grip on most everything in the country.

So our ambassador in Singapore, former Miami trial lawyer and Obama mega-bundler
Kirk Wagar , is working on his own variant.

"Soft power diplomacy, baby!" he posted on his Facebook page last week, along
with a photo of himself in white pants and shirt, microphone in hand, at a
Singapore karaoke club. Apparently he's quite good at this.

"Learned something today," he wrote. "Singapore had never seen an Ambassador
from the United States do karaoke. I have rectified that situation. I hope it's
a good thing . . .Â "

Well, one can only hope.

al.kamen@washpost.com

The blog: washingtonpost.com/intheloop. Twitter: @InTheLoopWP.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


