                             1588 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            February 23, 2014 Sunday
                                Regional Edition

Congressman's 'suspicions' that Clinton ordered 'stand down' on Benghazi aren't
supported

BYLINE: Glenn Kessler

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 1132 words


"We need to have an answer of when the secretary of defense had assets that he
could have begun spinning up. Why there was not one order given to turn on one
Department of Defense asset? I have my suspicions, which is Secretary Clinton
told Leon [Panetta] to stand down, and we all heard about the stand-down order
for two military personnel."

- Rep. Darrell Issa (R-Calif.), remarks during a GOP fundraising dinner,
Concord, N.H., Feb. 17, 2014

The Fact Checker has written at length on the 2012 tragedy at Benghazi, Libya,
in which four Americans, including the U.S. ambassador, were killed. Some
readers may think it is old news. But every so often a new allegation emerges.

During a fundraising dinner for New Hampshire Republicans, Rep. Darrell Issa
(R-Calif.) raised a startling allegation: "I have my suspicions, which is
Secretary Clinton told Leon [Panetta] to stand down."

Issa is chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee and thus
has every right to raise provocative questions. But while allegations of a
"stand-down" order periodically emerged during the months-long investigation of
the incident, recent congressional reports have cast serious doubt on those
claims.

A report by Republicans on the Armed Services Committee recently declared:
"There was no 'stand down' order issued to U.S. military personnel in Tripoli
who sought to join the fight in Benghazi." A bipartisan Senate Intelligence
Committee report released in January said: "The Committee has reviewed the
allegations that U.S. personnel, including in the IC [Intelligence Community] or
DOD, prevented the mounting of any military relief effort during the attacks,
but the Committee has not found any of these allegations to be substantiated."

Issa actually appears to acknowledge that, saying that it was not characterized
as "stand down." But then he uses the phrase again in a series of questions:
"Was there a stand-down order to Leon Panetta or did he just not do his job? Was
there a stand-down order from the president who said he told them to use their
resources and they didn't use them?"

Granted, Issa is speaking off the cuff in response to a question, so maybe
precise clarity should not be expected. But he clearly suggests that someone -
in particular, possible presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton or even
President Obama - told Panetta not to act. As he put it, "Why there was not one
order given to turn on one Department of Defense asset?"

The facts

The official timeline of DOD actions on Sept. 11-12, 2012, shows that the
incident began at 3:42 p.m., Washington time, and that by 5 p.m., Panetta and
Gen. Martin Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, were at the White
House discussing possible options with Obama. A Predator drone arrived over the
Benghazi facility at 5:10 p.m. Between 6 p.m. and 8 p.m., Panetta convened a
series of meetings and gave verbal authorization for the following actions:

1. A Fleet Anti-Terrorism Security Team (FAST) platoon, stationed in Rota,
Spain, is told to deploy to Benghazi, while a second FAST platoon in Rota is
told to prepare to deploy to the embassy in Tripoli.

2. A Special Operations force training in central Europe, known as the
Commander's In-Extremis Force (CIF), is told to prepare to deploy to a staging
base in southern Europe.

3. A Special Operations force based in the United States is told to prepare to
deploy to a base in southern Europe.

The House Armed Services report makes it clear that Obama told Panetta to "do
whatever you need to do" - and that Clinton did not speak with him on Sept. 11
as deployment decisions were made.

Of course, the deployment of forces by Panetta turned out to be pretty poor. It
took six hours just for the units to prepare to depart for Libya. Not until 17
hours after Panetta issued the order did the CIF finally make it to the staging
base in southern Europe. An hour later, one FAST platoon arrived in Tripoli.
Thirty minutes after that, the Special Ops force from the United States arrived
in Europe.

The Armed Services report also says one FAST platoon was delayed because the
troops had to pause at a base to change clothes because of a request from the
Libyan government, which it said feared combat-ready troops would "unduly alarm
or inflame" Libyans.

So, contrary to Issa's claim that "not one order" was given to deploy one DOD
asset, there were plenty of orders. Meanwhile, there appears to be no evidence
that Clinton spoke directly with Panetta, in an apparent effort to override
Obama's instructions. So what is Issa talking about?

Frederick Hill, a spokesman for the Oversight Committee, said that Issa was
speaking of Clinton and Panetta as "institutional actors" operating at the
"highest levels of the State Department and the Department of Defense." He
suggested the shorthand of "Clinton" and "Leon" was used because it was easier
for the audience to understand than "State" and "DOD."

Hmm. Is this credible? After all, Issa was speaking to a political audience, and
he just happened to evoke the name of the leading Democratic candidate for
president. Last time we checked, the "State Department" was not a potential
candidate for president.

Hill said: "Chairman Issa is asking a very straightforward question: Did
high-level figures at the State Department, working under Secretary Clinton's
direction, impede the military response to Benghazi, or was this only about the
military not being prepared and positioned to respond?"

Hill said none of Panetta's orders directed units to Benghazi as fighting
occurred: "If you're fixated on the term 'turn on,' remember that military units
frequently reposition - the chairman is clearly talking about why a DOD combat
asset was not directed to go to Benghazi."

The Pinocchio test

When the Fact Checker gave Four Pinocchios to Issa for claiming that Clinton
signed a cable denying security for Benghazi, we said: "He would be on stronger
ground if he didn't claim that she wrote this or signed it, but that it was
fishy and he was seeking more information."

Hill suggests that Issa's reference to "suspicions" that Clinton told Panetta to
"stand down," as well as his series of questions, represent that sort of caveat.

It is correct that Issa poses a series of questions, but his repeated use of the
phrase "stand down" and his personalizing of the alleged actions ("Secretary
Clinton;" "Leon") leave a distinct impression that either Clinton or Obama
delivered some sort of instruction to Panetta to not act as forcefully as
possible. He even incorrectly asserts that not a single order was given to use
any DOD asset. One could argue the response was slow, bungled or poorly handled.
But Issa is crossing a line when he suggests there was no response - or a
deliberate effort to hinder it. He earns Four Pinocchios.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


