                             1562 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            January 14, 2014 Tuesday
                                Regional Edition

TV highlights for Jan. 14: 'American Experience: 1964' and 'Friday Night Tykes'

BYLINE: - Rachel Lubitz

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 369 words


Partly based on Jon Margolis's "The Last Innocent Year: America in 1964," the
documentary "American Experience: 1964" (PBS at 8 p.m.) explores a pivotal year
in politics and culture, from the influence of Betty Friedan's "The Feminine
Mystique" to President Lyndon B. Johnson signing the Civil Rights Act.

The girls go ahead and read Ali's diary on "Pretty Little Liars" (ABC Family at
8) and attempt to crack its code, but that proves difficult when the diary is
full of deeply personal stories about all of them.

Gibbs and his team track down one of terrorist Parsa's cohorts using evidence
from the drone attack on "NCIS" (CBS at 8) while an emotionally shaken McGee
struggles with the ramifications of the incident.

On her quest to be liked by everyone, Jess looks to improve her friendship with
Coach on "New Girl" (Fox at 9), but Nick takes issue when Jess and Coach start
bonding over a basketball team he dislikes.

SERIES PREMIERE: "Friday Night Tykes" (Esquire at 9) is an in-depth look at the
super-serious world of the Texas Youth Football Association. The ten-part
docuseries sheds a critical light on the organization where teams are made up of
players as young as 8 years old.

SERIES PREMIERE: The reality/competition show "Inside Job" (TNT at 9) has
candidates living together and vying for a corporate executive position with a
six-figure salary. One of them is a mole who is spying on their behavior.

SERIES PREMIERE: Another business-savvy show premiering on TNT is "Save Our
Business" (at 10), in which a successful entrepreneur (Peter Jones) visits
struggling businesses and tries to help them dig out.

RETURNING SHOW: On the second-season opener of "Kroll Show" (Comedy Central at
10:30), C-Czar enrolls in "Dad Academy" and Too Much Tuna claims another victim.

Television personality and football analyst Michael Strahan stops by "The Late
Show With David Letterman" (CBS at 11:35), with musical guest Jennifer Nettles.

Actor Matt Damon and comedian Larry the Cable Guy are on "The Tonight Show With
Jay Leno" (NBC at 11:35), with a musical performance from Chris Isaak.

Actors Matt LeBlanc and Lupita Nyong'o come to "Jimmy Kimmel Live" (ABC at
11:35), with musical guest the Fray.

- Rachel Lubitz

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


