                             1533 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 29, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On TV Wednesday

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 714 words


8 P.M. (BBC America) A POET IN NEW YORK (2014) ''Do not go gentle into that good
night,'' wrote the Welsh poet Dylan Thomas, whose centennial was Monday. ''Rage,
rage against the dying of the light.'' In 1953, Thomas was on his way to Los
Angeles to work on an opera with Igor Stravinsky when he stopped in New York for
a rehearsal of his play ''Under Milk Wood'' at the Poetry Center. Even as his
fame soared, his marriage was failing, his health was deteriorating, and his
life was consumed by misery. Tom Hollander, above, portrays Thomas in this film,
which was written by Andrew Davies, directed by Aisling Walsh and set in New
York and Laugharne, Wales. It focuses on Thomas's final days, when, on a smoggy
morning in Greenwich Village, after a bout of hard drinking, he died at the age
of 39.

9 A.M. (HBO) THE GIRL (2012) Sienna Miller, below, portrays Tippi Hedren, and
Toby Jones is Alfred Hitchcock in this drama about Hitchcock's supposed
obsession with Ms. Hedren, the enigmatic blonde who starred in ''The Birds'' and
''Marnie.'' And that is where her stardom began and ended. After Ms. Hedren
rebuffed Hitchcock's advances, according to ''Spellbound by Beauty,'' a
biography of him by Donald Spoto, Hitchcock subjected her to repeated attacks on
a closed set using real, and quite savage, birds instead of the mechanical ones
she had been promised, and refused to let her out of a contract. Imelda Staunton
plays Hitchcock's wife. ''The trouble with 'The Girl' is that it tries to
psychoanalyze Hitchcock but fails by trying to know the man too much,''
Alessandra Stanley wrote in The New York Times. ''It's a movie about Hitchcock
that ignores his best advice: 'Suspense is like a woman. The more left to the
imagination, the more the excitement.' ''

4:30 P.M. (TCM) MARNIE (1964) A wealthy publisher (Sean Connery) marries a
compulsive thief (Tippi Hedren, right, with Mr. Connery) and tries to unlock the
mysteries of her mind in this Hitchcock thriller. Writing in The Times, Eugene
Archer called the film ''at once a fascinating study of a sexual relationship
and the master's most disappointing film in years.''

8 P.M. (El Rey) LUCHA UNDERGROUND High-flying masked warriors take to the mat
for a $100,000 prize in this new series centered on the Mexican sport of lucha
libre wrestling.

9 P.M. (ABC) MODERN FAMILY Claire (Julie Bowen) lets Phil (Ty Burrell) be in
charge of Halloween. Gloria (Sofia Vergara) chooses Shrek and Fiona costumes for
her and Jay (Ed O'Neill), but he wants to be Prince Charming, with a full head
of hair, instead. And Mitchell (Jesse Tyler Ferguson) is distracted during his
closing arguments on a big case by a court stenographer dressed as a spider. In
''black-ish,'' at 9:30, Dre (Anthony Anderson) worries that his holiday will be
ruined when his kids refuse to take part in the Johnson family tradition of
seeing who can pull off the biggest prank.

10 P.M. (Esquire) WEEKEND FIX The actor Omar Benson Miller and the fashion
designer Andres Izquieta use social networking to seek out the best hotels,
restaurants and local experiences for 48-hour adventures. They begin in San
Francisco, where they race down a winding street on a Big Wheel, play cricket in
a city park, kayak on the bay and hang out with the chef Michael Mina.

10 P.M. (Comedy Central) SOUTH PARK The town screams ''privacy invasion'' after
Cartman and Butters get their hands on a drone, then upload an explicit video
onto the Internet.

10 P.M. (FX) AMERICAN HORROR STORY: FREAK SHOW The two-faced Edward Mordrake
(Wes Bentley) searches for a freak to add to his entourage. Elsa (Jessica Lange)
recounts her previous life in Germany. And Jimmy (Evan Peters), the lobster boy,
and Maggie (Emma Roberts), the fortuneteller, encounter Twisty the Clown (John
Carroll Lynch).

What's Streaming Now

MONSTER MANAGEMENT ''We did it with werewolves, we did it with vampires. We are
going to make witches sexy again.'' So says the public relations team (NoÃ«l
Wells and Soren Bowie) at 4M, a.k.a. Modern Monster Makeover and Management,
who've made it the company's mission to rescue ghouls from irrelevance. It's all
about the branding in this three-part mini-series. After all, they advise,
''Frankenstein's Monster just sounds slow, clunky and stupid.'' (cracked.com)
KATHRYN SHATTUCK

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/29/arts/television/whats-on-tv-wednesday.html

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPH BY LAURIE SPARHAM/MODERN TV)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


