                             1516 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 17, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Haqqani Militant Leaders Are Captured, Afghan Officials Say

BYLINE: By DECLAN WALSH; Matthew Rosenberg and Eric Schmitt contributed
reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1030 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- In a blow to a major component of the Taliban insurgency,
two senior leaders of the Haqqani Network, a group responsible for numerous
attacks against the Afghan government and its Western allies, were reported to
be in Afghan custody on Thursday.

The Afghan intelligence service said it had captured Anas Haqqani, a son of the
Haqqani Network's founder, and Hafiz Rashid, a senior commander who coordinated
suicide bombings, during an operation in eastern Khost Province on Tuesday
night.

But a senior United States government official said the two men had been
arrested in a Persian Gulf country and transferred into Afghan custody, and that
the Afghan account was a smoke screen to hide the identity of the gulf country.

''Their arrest is a signal that the gulf governments are going to make it more
difficult for Afghan insurgents to raise funds,'' said the official, who spoke
on the condition of anonymity. He declined to identify the country involved, but
said that the two men had been traveling in Qatar, Saudi Arabia and a third
country he described as ''a major transit hub in the region.''

Anas Haqqani is not a well-known commander of the Haqqani Network, which is run
by his older brother, Sirajuddin Haqqani. But in the past year he has become a
more prominent member of the group through his fund-raising work in the gulf
countries, which have been a rich source of money for the group since the 1980s,
American and Afghan officials said.

The Afghan spy agency, the National Directorate of Security, said that Mr.
Haqqani had also directed Haqqani Network propaganda efforts on social media and
played a crucial role in strategic decision-making.

The agency described the other captive, Mr. Rashid, as a senior militant
commander who had equipped suicide bombers, chosen their targets and moved them
from safe houses in Pakistan across the border into Afghanistan.

Mr. Rashid also comes from a prominent jihadist family. His brother, Mohammad
Nabi Omari, was one of five detainees who were transferred from the American
prison at Guant√°namo Bay, Cuba, to Qatar last June, as part of a deal to secure
the release of the captured American soldier Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl.

Among recent attacks for which Afghan officials believe Mr. Rashid was
responsible was a devastating car bombing that killed at least 89 people in a
bazaar in eastern Afghanistan this summer, according to a former Afghan
official, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss intelligence.

In its statement, the Afghan intelligence agency claimed that Mr. Rashid had
been living in the Chakwal district of Pakistan at the time of his capture -- an
area that is a famous recruiting ground for the Pakistani armed forces.

The reference was a pointed nod to longstanding Afghan accusations that the
Pakistani military is secretly supporting the Haqqani Network, which has
operated freely from the tribal district of North Waziristan, to protect its
strategic interests inside Afghanistan.

For the Afghans, the arrests presented an important success at a time of great
strain for the security forces, with Taliban forces stepping up attacks on
government forces as American combat troops are pulling out of the country.

The Haqqani Network has carried out some of the most audacious attacks of recent
years, including assaults on the InterContinental Hotel, the American Embassy
and NATO headquarters in Kabul, and an American base in Wardak Province. The
Afghan intelligence service described the capture of the two men as ''one of the
biggest and important arrests,'' and said it would have a major strategic
impact.

Still, the Haqqanis have suffered major leadership losses in the past, only to
continue operations. A deputy leader, Nasiruddin Haqqani, was shot dead on the
outskirts of the Pakistani capital, Islamabad, last November. A year earlier, an
American drone strike in North Waziristan killed his brother, Badruddin Haqqani,
who was considered the group's operational commander.

An American congressional report in January estimated the Haqqani Network's
strength at about 3,000 fighters.

The American government official said that the arrests were partly a gesture of
good will toward the new Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani, who some gulf states
view as a ''more open'' figure than his predecessor, Hamid Karzai.

''Karzai wouldn't listen to the gulf states, or anyone else,'' said the
official, referring to acrimonious disputes over a Taliban peace process,
anchored in Qatar, that ultimately collapsed.

Now that Mr. Ghani's government has two Haqqani leaders in its custody, there
was speculation about how they might be used.

Two other American officials, both speaking on the condition of anonymity,
expressed concern that the Afghans might try to trade them for Mullah Abdul
Ghani Baradar, a senior Taliban leader who is believed to be in Pakistani
custody and has been the subject of fevered negotiations between the two
countries.

Others say they could be used to kick-start the moribund peace talks. In the
past, American officials have tried to draw the Haqqanis into the larger Taliban
talks, in recognition of their central role in the insurgency.

In 2011, an American official held an unofficial meeting with Ibrahim Haqqani, a
senior family member, in a gulf country. One American official with knowledge of
the meeting, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that a senior official
of the Pakistani spy agency had accompanied Mr. Haqqani to the meeting.

That effort toward negotiations ultimately foundered. But now, Mr. Ghani has
indicated that he is ready to try again.

During the presidential race, his campaign claimed to have worked through tribal
intermediaries to win promises from the Haqqanis that they would not disrupt the
runoff election, according to a report released by the International Crisis
Group on Thursday.

How Mr. Ghani handles the latest arrests may offer a hint of his broader policy
toward insurgents, said Graeme Smith, a Kabul-based analyst with the Crisis
Group. ''Is this an opportunity to use this guy as a channel for negotiations?''
he said. ''Or is it a chance to punish someone who has been responsible for a
great number of deaths?''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/17/world/asia/haqqani-leaders-arrested-afghanista
n-khost.html

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Officials in Kabul said Hafiz Rashid, left, and Anas Haqqani
were in custody.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


