                             1507 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 10, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Listings: Pop

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 2316 words


Prices may not reflect ticketing service charges. For full reviews of recent
concerts: nytimes.com/music. A searchable guide to these and other shows is at
nytimes.com/events.

Africa Now! South Africa Festival (Friday through Sunday) The Apollo wraps its
four-day celebration of South African popular culture, which includes films and
discussion panels and nods to the 20th anniversary of Nelson Mandela's
inauguration. The largest musical offering, the Mainstage concert on Saturday at
8 p.m., includes performances by the Xhosa singer-songwriter Simphiwe Dana, the
New Wave a cappella ensemble the Soil, and the rapper-poet Tumi Molekane. Other
shows include the jazz and hip-hop singer-pianist Toya Delazy on Friday at 10
p.m., and the indie-jazz group the Muffinz on Saturday at 10 p.m. Apollo
Theater, 253 West 125th Street, Harlem, 800-745-3000, apollotheater.org; $20 to
$55. (Stacey Anderson)

Nat Baldwin (Tuesday) This bassist of the celebrated art-rockers Dirty
Projectors broadens his scope on his sixth solo album, ''In the Hollows,'' on
which he sings intimate, folksy narratives over tempestuous chamber-pop strings
or his own unadorned instrument. Twisting, jazzy passages add to the intrigue.
He opens for Ought. At 9 p.m., Bowery Ballroom, 6 Delancey Street, near the
Bowery, Lower East Side, 800-745-3000, boweryballroom.com; $15. (Anderson)

Bastille (Friday) Still ringing in soccer stadiums the world over, this British
pop band's ''Pompeii'' has enough warm harmonies, galvanizing lyrics and seeping
synths to make Hot Chip and Arcade Fire call foul. The fast-ascendant rockers
won the Brit Award for British breakthrough act and delivered a droll set at the
recent Governors Ball festival that included a ponderous take on TLC's ''No
Scrubs.'' At 8 p.m., Radio City Music Hall, 866-858-0008, ticketmaster.com; $35
and $45. (Anderson)

&#x2605; Bomba Estéreo (Tuesday) This ebullient quintet from Bogotá wraps
traditional Colombian cumbia rhythms around psychedelic electronic beats, to
whirlwind results. Its percussive fusion has been embraced on the American
festival circuit: in the past few years the group has performed on the
sweltering stages of Lollapalooza, Bonnaroo and Coachella. ''Elegancia
Tropical,'' the band's most recent album, was released in 2012. At 8 p.m., Stage
48, 605 West 48th Street, Clinton, 212-957-1800, stage48.com; $25. (Anderson)

Betty Buckley (Friday and Saturday) The return of the much-missed Betty Buckley
-- with several concerts at Joe's Pub in support of her superior pop album,
''Ghostlight'' -- is a special occasion. The record, produced by her fellow
Texan, T-Bone Burnett, touches all four corners of Ms. Buckley's complicated
sensibility: the Texan country girl, the Broadway diva, the New Age jazz singer
and the aficionado of great, offbeat pop songs. The songwriters include Abbey
Lincoln, Tom Waits, Jacques Brel and Mary Chapin Carpenter. Friday at 7 p.m.,
Saturday at 7 and 9 p.m., Joe's Pub, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East
Village, 212-967-7555, joespub.com; $25 to $75. (Stephen Holden)

Buke and Gase (Friday) This Brooklyn duo emit a blast of twee steampunk sounds
-- from a largely homemade string section and other sources -- that the singer
Arone Dyer's knifelike vocals cut through. With Battle Trance and Palm. At 9
p.m., Music Hall of Williamsburg, 66 North Sixth Street, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000,
musichallofwilliamsburg.com; $12 in advance; $15 at the door. (Anderson)

CBGB Music Festival (through Sunday) Now in its third year, this festival
celebrates the East Village's former crux of punk with a multiday spree of
independent rock, from the likes of Surfer Blood, Los Elk, We Are Scientists and
many others. There's also a free concert on Sunday in Times Square, a place that
the liberty-spiked punks who frequented the original CBGB wouldn't have ventured
unless they were trying to maximize the effects of their hallucinogens. Jane's
Addiction, the hard-nosed ''Been Caught Stealing'' rockers, has maintained a
bizarre revolving door of myriad breakups and reunions since 1991. Sunday's
concert, from 11 a.m. to 7:30 p.m., will also feature performances by We Are
Scientists, Devo and School of Rock. More information is at cbgbfest.com.
(Anderson)

Def Jam at 30 (Thursday) When Rick Rubin founded Def Jam Recordings in 1983, the
future mega-producer was living in a New York University dorm room and
moonlighting as a D.J. for his pals, the Beastie Boys. Soon after, Russell
Simmons joined the imprint, and for three decades it has been one of the most
influential forces in hip-hop. At Barclays, a deep roster of rap and R&B stars
-- including Rick Ross, 2 Chainz, DMX, Foxy Brown, Method Man, Redman and Jhene
Aiko -- gather to celebrate the label. At 8 p.m., Barclays Center, 620 Atlantic
Avenue, at Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, 800-745-3000, barclayscenter.com; $60 to
$190. (Anderson)

Lila Downs (Friday and Saturday) This folkloric singer-songwriter from Oaxaca,
Mexico, effortlessly balances warbling refrains in multiple regional dialects
with American blues and flamenco-tinged jazz. Her 2012 release, ''Pecados y
Milagros,'' received a Latin Grammy for best folk album. This weekend she makes
her debut at the Appel Room at Jazz at Lincoln Center. At 7 and 9:30 p.m., Oct.
10-11 at 7 p.m. and 9:30 p.m., 60th Street and Broadway, 212-721-6500, jalc.org;
$60 and $80. (Anderson)

&#x2605; Hugh Masekela and Vusi Mahlasela (Friday and Wednesday) Mr. Masekela,
the South African fluegelhorn player, is among the most statesman-like of jazz
musicians, a melodist forever aware of his transaction with an audience. He will
perform on Friday night with the singer-songwriter and activist Vusi Mahlasela
at Carnegie Hall as part of its UBUNTU: Music and Arts of South Africa festival.
They will also be joined by Dave Matthews and Somi in this celebration of 20
years of democracy and the end of apartheid in South Africa. A bonus for Mr.
Masekela's fans: He's scheduled to play a special gig at Minton's on Wednesday
evening. It's a rare chance to see him play such an intimate space with a full
band, featuring the pianist Larry Willis and the saxophonist Morris Goldberg.
Friday at 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800,
carnegiehall.org; limited ticket availability. Wednesday from 7 to 11 p.m.,
Minton's, 206 West 118th Street, Harlem, 212-243-2222, mintonsharlem.com; $50,
with a two-drink minimum. (Nate Chinen)

Escape Music Festival (Saturday and Sunday) Governors Island may be closed for
the season, but that doesn't mean the fun has to end just yet. The picturesque
Governors Beach Club is hosting one last weekend concert: the dance-focused
Escape Music Festival, which was originally slated for a site in Brooklyn. The
two-day festival will feature D.J. sets from Girl Talk, Moby and Neon Indian,
and performances by Placebo, Yeasayer, the Crystal Method, Ra Ra Riot and
others. From noon to midnight, Governors Beach Club, escapemusicfest.com; $65
for a day pass; $109 for weekend passes. (Anderson)

Fleetwood Mac (Saturday) The most famous exes in '70s rock, Stevie Nicks and
Lindsey Buckingham, continue to tour with their ''Rumours''-era bandmates --
including the keyboardist-singer Christine McVie, whose recent return to the
lineup is a watershed moment for fans. As with their mostly placid last outing,
they'll rely on their arsenal of radio staples, including ''Rhiannon,'' ''Go
Your Own Way'' and ''Landslide.'' At 8 p.m., Prudential Center, 165 Mulberry
Street, Newark, 800-745-3000, prucenter.com; $49.50 to $199.50. (Anderson)

&#x2605; Flying Lotus (Wednesday) This ambitious electronic and hip-hop producer
(and great-nephew of the jazz musician Alice Coltrane) just released his fifth
studio album, ''You're Dead!'' (Warp), an ingenious, vaguely mystical excursion
that embraces funk, eerie guitar and marquee rappers (Snoop Dogg, Kendrick
Lamar). With Thundercat, Flying Lotus' frequent collaborator. At 8 p.m.,
Terminal 5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com; sold
out. (Anderson)

Fresh 102.7 Fall Fest with Ingrid Michaelson (Thursday) Ms. Michaelson, the
Brooklyn indie-pop singer-songwriter with the piercing yet featherweight trill,
is best known for entreating her lover to ''do what bunnies do'' on her single
''You and I,'' but her saccharine sensibilities are usually a little more
diplomatic. On her newest studio album, ''Lights Out,'' Ms. Michaelson turned to
danceable and bluesy infatuation tunes. She performs as part of Fresh 102.7's
second fall festival, sharing the stage with Neon Trees, Bleachers and others.
At 8 p.m., Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, 800-745-3000,
beacontheatre.com; $30 to $155. (Anderson)

Marketa Irglova (Friday) Ms. Irglova is the fairer half of the Swell Season, the
folk duo with her ''Once'' co-star Glen Hansard. They also share an Academy
Award for best original song for ''Falling Slowly,'' which was featured in the
film. Her second solo effort, ''Muna,'' was released last month. At 7:30 p.m.,
Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich Village,
212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com; $20. (Anderson)

Jordan Knight and Nick Carter (Friday) Latent crushes are likely to reignite in
the presence of these two former teenage heartthrobs, each of whom represent a
different generation of teen-girl fandom and must have a good 100 Tiger Beat
photo spreads between them. Mr. Knight (of New Kids on the Block) joined Mr.
Carter (of Backstreet Boys) on ''Nick & Knight,'' a recent collaborative pop
album; sadly, its song titles did not prove as imaginative as the ones on
''Unfinished,'' Mr. Knight's 2011 solo album, which featured the subtle paeans
''Up N Down'' and ''O-Face.'' At 8 p.m., Best Buy Theater, 1515 Broadway, at
44th Street, 888-929-7849, bestbuytheater.com; $45. (Anderson)

The Month in Cabaret (through Oct. 27) As Betty Buckley concludes her run at
Joe's Pub, Molly Ringwald is in the middle of a two-week engagement at Café
Carlyle. It's the first New York cabaret engagement for Ms. Ringwald, whose 2013
debut album, ''Except Sometimes,'' is a collection of standards in a light
pop-jazz idiom, sung with an ingenuous charm. Friday, Saturday and Tuesday
through Oct. 18 at 8:45 p.m., with a 10:45 p.m. set on Saturday and Oct. 18, 35
East 76th Street, Manhattan, 212-744-1600, thecarlyle.com; $50 to $130, with a
$25 minimum. Other high points are the appearances of Amanda McBroom with her
husband, George Ball, on Tuesday at 7:30 p.m. at 54 Below (254 West 54th Street,
Manhattan, 646-476-3551, 54below.com; $30 to $55, with a $25 minimum), singing
theater love songs in the grand tradition, and the chanteuse Joyce Breach, an
intimate, insightful interpreter of the American songbook, at Don't Tell Mama
(343 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-757-0788, donttellmamanyc.com; $20, with a
two-drink minimum) on Mondays at 7:30 p.m., through the month. (Holden)

Nina Persson (Wednesday) Ms. Persson, the lead singer of the '90s pop-rock band
the Cardigans, recently made her debut as a solo artist, recording under her own
name with ''Animal Heart.'' Though she is no stranger to recording alone -- she
previously released two unaided albums as A Camp -- ''Animal Heart'' is a more
confessional embrace of the frail nature of singer-songwriter folk, a distinct
left turn from her gilded past. At 8 p.m., Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street,
East Village, 212-353-1600, websterhall.com/events; $22. (Anderson)

Porter Robinson (Saturday and Sunday) Skrillex's electronic dance music protégé,
Mr. Robinson, is a 22-year-old D.J.-producer from Chapel Hill, N.C. His fast
hand with video game-influenced samples has earned him remix clients in Lady
Gaga and Avicii, and his debut, ''Worlds,'' diced up those influences and melded
them into more complex grooves. With Giraffage amd Lemâitre. At 9 p.m., Terminal
5, 610 West 56th Street, Clinton, 800-745-3000, terminal5nyc.com; $35 to $45;
sold out on Saturday. (Anderson)

&#x2605; Warpaint (Tuesday) With ''The Fool,'' Warpaint cinched the best debut
album of 2010, a sinewy and sleekly assertive offering of down-pace post-punk in
the style of Siouxie and the Banshees and noir thrillers. This all-female group
performs songs from its sexy, self-titled follow-up, released this year, which
leans toward New Wave pop via rich keyboards. With Liam Finn. At 8 p.m., Webster
Hall, 125 East 11th Street, East Village, 866-777-8932, websterhall.com/events;
$25. (Anderson)

Wussy (Friday) The purveyors of such ingenious lines as ''I finally got your
letter/And your punctuation hit me like a truck'' (from the song ''Little Paper
Birds'') are thoughtful drone rockers from Ohio, and alternately terse and fluid
in all the right places. On ''Attica!,'' released in May, romantic strain is
scrutinized with gusto and punctuated by sensitive instrumental breaks. With
Handsome Jack. At 10 p.m., Knitting Factory, 361 Metropolitan Avenue, at
Havemeyer Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 347-529-6696, bk.knittingfactory.com;
$12 at the door. (Anderson)

Yelle (Friday) This dance-pop sprite from Saint-Brieuc, France, performs alone
and also lends her name to a delightful trio, whose ''Safari Disco Club'' was
2011's brightest combustion of New Wave nostalgia and Europop bounce. At 7 p.m.,
Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, 800-745-3000,
irvingplaza.com; $25. (Anderson)

Yuna (Wednesday) Nirvana's ''Come as You Are'' is in good hands with this jazzy
pop chanteuse from Malaysia; her cover of the grunge hit writhes with
tempestuous keys and her gorgeous falsetto lilt. Her second album released
stateside, ''Nocturnal,'' had flashes of Ronettes retroism and folksy harmonies,
but veered more soul-pop with collaborations with members of Quadron, Incubus
and the Neptunes. With Taylor McFerrin. At 8 p.m., Stage 48, 605 West 48th
Street, Clinton, 212-957-1800, stage48.com; $25. (Anderson)

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/10/arts/music/pop-rock-cabaret-listings-for-oct-1
0-16.html

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


