                             1547 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             January 5, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Headline goes here and:

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 2177 words


When an icon of the 20th century's strivings against oppression passes away, it
is an appropriate time to take freedom's audit. Â¶ "The struggles that follow
the victory of formal equality and universal franchise may not be as filled with
drama and moral clarity as those that came before," President Obama said in his
eulogy of Nelson Mandela last month, "but they are no less important." And
United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon urged the world to be "inspired" by
Mandela's spirit. "His death has awakened in all of us," he said, "the flame of
human rights and the beacon of hope." Â¶ Their message was clear: We have come
far, but there is a great deal left to do. Â¶ Yet despite this rhetoric of
rededication and hope, the ground of human rights is crumbling beneath us. If we
seem to have moved beyond "drama and moral clarity," it is only because we no
longer know where we are going. In fact, a 150-year experiment in creating
global rules to protect and defend individual human beings is coming to an end.

When an icon of the 20th century's strivings against oppression passes away, it
is an appropriate time to take freedom's audit.

"The struggles that follow the victory of formal equality and universal
franchise may not be as filled with drama and moral clarity as those that came
before," President Obama said in his eulogy of Nelson Mandela last month, "but
they are no less important." And United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon
urged the world to be "inspired" by Mandela's spirit. "His death has awakened in
all of us," he said, "the flame of human rights and the beacon of hope."

Their message was clear: We have come far, but there is a great deal left to do.

Yet despite this rhetoric of rededication and hope, the ground of human rights
is crumbling beneath us. If we seem to have moved beyond "drama and moral
clarity," it is only because we no longer know where we are going. In fact, a
150-year experiment in creating global rules to protect and defend individual
human beings is coming to an end.

The evidence is all around us. Authoritarian pushback against human rights in
China raises the prospect of a new superpower utterly opposed to the hitherto
dominant language of universal rights. And Russia, if anything, outdoes China,
with Vladimir Putin manipulating his citizens' legitimate aspirations for even
basic freedoms. From the introduction of sharia law in Brunei  to the
consolidation of a murderous military regime in Egypt (where the alternative was
the ultra-conservative Muslim Brotherhood), we see examples everywhere of
resistance to human rights, in practice and in principle.

In a stupefying act of bravado, Saudi Arabia, one of the world's most systematic
abusers of human rights, rejected its seat on the Security Council, saying the
United Nations fails to prevent "the violation of rights" around the world.
African leaders resist the authority of the International Criminal Court. Bashar
al-Assad strengthens his grip on power in Syria after his regime uses chemical
weapons to murder thousands. We see extreme conservatism on gay rights
throughout Africa, the Middle East, Eastern Europe and now on India's Supreme
Court. And when the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) declares,
seemingly in earnest, that the exercise of human rights may be limited by "the
just requirements of national security, public order, public health, public
safety, public morality, as well as the general welfare of the peoples in a
democratic society," that is a mandate for executive power and social
conservatism, not for inalienable rights.

A recent Pew Global Attitudes survey  highlighted "the global divide" that
splits the West from the rest on social acceptance of homosexuality. In a world
where eight in 10 people identify with a religious group, and where conservative
forms of all major faiths - Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Judaism - are
increasingly prominent and politically salient, the outlook for radical change
in social attitudes outside the West and elite enclaves in developing countries
looks bleak. For the seventh consecutive year, Freedom House's  "Freedom in the
World" report found more declines than gains in the number of countries rated
"free." Russia led the way in repression but was hardly unique, as the green
shoots of the Arab Spring led to widespread authoritarian retrenchment.

Freedom House called on the United States and Europe to do more. But the United
States is worse than an ambivalent onlooker. Its use of torture and rendition
against al-Qaeda suspects, its detentions without trial at Guantanamo, its drone
program and targeted assassinations, and its rejection of the International
Criminal Court all  undermine the very idea, let alone the practice, of human
rights.

Even the early promise of the Obama administration has dimmed. Political and
security realities have reduced the scope of American unilateralism, the
president admitted in his address to the U.N. General Assembly in September. The
future, he said, will be about international and regional partners for peace and
prosperity. In an era when containing China is paramount, we know what
"partners" means: deals. No ASEAN state should expect a call from the president
about human rights anytime soon.

Of course, governments have always been reluctant to tie their hands with human
rights considerations, and cultural and religious diversity guarantees that the
secular global rights regime will always have detractors and foes. But this is
more than a transient change. We have taken the two-steps-forward, one-step-back
nature of human rights for granted, assuming that the arc of history does indeed
bend toward justice. The assumption underlying Obama's Mandela eulogy is that
matters of compliance, not principle, are the main challenge remaining. But the
great moral drama of liberal freedoms vs. state and religious repression and
discrimination is alive and insistent today, even as we are in a forced retreat
from the battlefield.

This isn't just a change from the 1990s, the 1970s or even the 1950s. It is the
end of a historic project that began in Europe in 1863 with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the first permanent, secular, international
organization dedicated to the protection of the suffering individual. The export
of a liberal-humanist vision of global civilization, first through empire and
then via the 20th century's international institutions, has reached an impasse.
Europe's slow political decline has been disguised for decades by American
power. Now the two are diverging, the Asia-Pacific calling Americans to turn
East. The world in which global rules were assumed to be secular, universal and
nonnegotiable rested on the presumption of a deep worldwide consensus about
human rights - but this consensus is illusory.

The first challenge is multipolarity. It's been more than a century since we've
lived in a truly multipolar world. Now, as power shifts rapidly to Asia, the
influence of Europe, so often the driving force for human rights and
international justice, has waned. The United States has proved a fair-weather
friend for human rights abroad and is now far more interested in China and its
own export markets in Asia and the Pacific. The new and re-emerging powers known
as the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) are not uniformly
against human rights - although the records of Russia and China are abysmal -
but they will increasingly want a say on global rules and who gets to set them.
Newly emerging states are challenging settled opinion on transnational justice
and humanitarian intervention, which they often interpret as victor's justice
and regime change. And the global rules and principles that organizations such
as the United Nations rely on were not written by the vast majority of the
world's peoples, who have long seen powerful states declare exceptions for
themselves and their allies. Newly powerful states will challenge this system -
and seek exceptions of their own.

A multipolar world means more compromise - as we already see in Syria - more
back-scratching and less principled denunciation. America's notorious skepticism
about most human rights treaties has in the past been tempered because
international rights seemed to go hand in hand with Washington's goal of
spreading democracy. But opponents can now see U.S. ambivalence about
strengthening global liberal institutions - outside the trade and finance realm
- and know there will be little pushback when the stakes are high.

Human rights made sense for a secularizing Europe that sought a moral
alternative to religious faith. But the world has not followed the secular path.
If anything, it is becoming more intense in its religiosity - that is the second
challenge. Over the past century, for example, Christianity has seen a massive
shift toward the south, with more than 60 percent of Christians now living in
Africa, Asia and Latin America. In Africa alone, the number of Christians rose
from 9 million to 516 million between 1910 and 2010. And we are as aware of the
intensity of Islamic faith held by millions in many of the countries of the
Middle East, North Africa and South Asia as we are of the passionate evangelism
shared by millions of Christians in the Americas and Africa particularly.

The language of human rights is a language of protest and resistance, not of
authority and discrimination.  In a religious world, secular human rights of
recent heritage and ambiguous origin increasingly compete with long-standing
cultural claims legitimated by traditions and gods. Where strong faith meets
human rights, the classic modernizing assumption - that secular rights trump
religion - no longer holds.

A more multipolar world, America's ambivalence, Europe's decline and more
competition from faith-based movements - all these forces put extreme pressure
on a human rights model that is heavily Westernized and centralized in funding
and organization. And so a paradox emerges. Achieving progress in civil and
political rights, for example, might mean ceding ground in other areas such as
social justice and women's rights. All rights are equally important to the
global human rights regime with which we are familiar. But for many of those who
are poor, or committed to socialist politics, or deeply religious and/or
conservative, both inside and outside the West, which rights deserve primacy
requires discussion and compromise, not diktats from New York and Geneva.

The classic Human Rights Watch strategy of "naming and shaming" rights abusers
is irrelevant in cases where, for example, the imposition of sharia law is
considered desirable by those who must be shamed for change to happen. In the
multipolar world, justice for acts of egregious violence may mean the death
penalty - or it may mean outright forgiveness. This world may be one where women
seeking an end to domestic violence and desirous of education for their
daughters nevertheless oppose reproductive rights on principle. Or where the
idea that children have rights they can claim against their parents, rather than
obligations, seems to strike at the heart of the most valued social institution
of all, the family.

In this world, religious groups of all kinds have an opportunity to play a
greater role in struggles for freedom from hunger and repression than they have
done in the decades when secular experts in development and human rights held
sway. Pope Francis, Time magazine's "Person of the Year,"  has insisted  that
the church is not a nongovernmental organization - meaning it has more to offer
than secular activism and advocacy. The church has a deeper, more powerful, more
attractive and more important spiritual message to spread, he has said, surely
recognizing that the weak grip of conventional Western human rights principles
in individual communities is no match for the moral power of the church. The new
pope's  seemingly more liberal stances on social issues and his critique of
capitalism may make him a better bet for radical change - he can in principle
mobilize a billion people - than the rather arid, dry and legalistic claims of
secular human rights advocates.

What the classical human rights movement has achieved is the recognition of each
human being as the moral equal of all others. This is a massive feat. But the
nationalist, authoritarian and conservative-religious backlash against the
language and practices of secular human rights opens the need for alternative
forms of mobilization, of which conventional human rights - meaning civil and
political rights diffused from the West - will be just one part.

We are waking from the European dream of one world under global, secular law.
The result may be a reinvigorated universal church. Or it may be parallel and
permanent zones of freedom and zones of repression, and a global middle class
seeking desperately to move themselves, or at least their children, from one to
another.

sh18@soas.ac.uk

@SteveHopgood

Read more from Outlook, friend us on Facebook, and follow us on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


