                             1617 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            March 29, 2014 Saturday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Despite Sweet 16 loss, Cavs 'don't have to hang their heads'

BYLINE: Sally Jenkins

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 984 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


NEW YORK - You kept waiting for the circumstances to get to Virginia, for the
wide-eyed factor take over, for the Cavaliers to wilt in the flaring theatrical
lighting of Madison Square Garden, and the screaming brass horns of the bands,
and the deep drone of the roars that circled the rotunda. They never did;
instead, they just got a little tired and outmanned, and it took every bit of
experience for Michigan State to beat them in Friday's East Region semifinals,
61-59

At the start of the game, the question was whether the Cavaliers would be
overcome by the moment, or intimidated by the stage, or simply out-experienced
in what was the school's first appearance this deep in the NCAA tournament since
1995. But they were none of that - for a long stretch they were even great. By
the end, the only question was just how soon they will be back, because this is
a program that clearly belongs.

"They don't have to hang their heads for how they played," Virginia Coach Tony
Bennett said.

The Cavaliers were in an odd position: though top-seeded, they were truly an
underdog against a Michigan State program that has been to a half dozen Final
Fours under Tom Izzo. In the days leading up to the game, Bennett had cannily
played up the notion that the Cavaliers were the ing√©nues, no doubt because he
wanted his guys to maintain their ability to sucker the opponent.

All season, the Cavaliers' great advantage had been their element of surprise,
their unanticipated quality. "They're more athletic than they look," Izzo
remarked. They were also bigger, tougher and faster. Everything about them was a
notch better than expected, from Mike Tobey's surprising combination of size and
touch, to Joe Harris's ability to see open angles in a defense, to Anthony
Gill's ability to rip to the rim, to their collective will to scrape for every
ugly second-chance point.

Bennett spent three seasons playing with the Charlotte Hornets - yet he
pretended to marvel over the New York City gridlock as if he'd never seen it
before. "To navigate the traffic to get here on time was an accomplishment," he
said. He oohed and awed at the posters of rock stars on the walls at Madison
Square Garden, and gazed around in the New York Knicks' locker room as if
impressed by it, despite the horrible team that inhabits it.

"I'm trying to steal some of their sets from the white board," Bennett said.

"Don't do that," someone answered.

It was all a Shirley Temple act. The Cavaliers didn't luck into the ACC title
and a top seed, they seized it by smothering opponents with the No. 1 scoring
defense in the country.

"When you win 18 out of 19 games in the ACC, when you beat the likes of Duke and
Syracuse the way they did and a lot of other teams, there's no question, they're
no fluke," Izzo said the day before the game. 'This is, in some people's minds,
the best team in the country."

But note the qualifier: they weren't the best team in Izzo's own mind, or at
least he was going to make them prove it to him. At 59, Izzo had 15 years of
experience on Bennett, and the upper hand in sheer March know-how. Adriean Payne
and Keith Appling are trying to continue a tradition under Izzo in which every
Spartans senior has appeared in a Final Four.

"We got banners hanging up in the practice facilities," Payne said. "So we
always know it's right there and it's always on our mind no matter what."

Izzo also had a slight psychological upper hand given that he had won a previous
meeting with Bennett in an NCAA tournament setting. In the 2000 Final Four, he
beat a Wisconsin squad coached by Bennett's father, Dick, with Bennett on the
bench as an assistant, and went on to win the national title. So Izzo knew
something of what to expect from a Bennett-coached team - stifling defense and
efficient ball control - and he was utterly unfazed by the Cavaliers'
suffocating D and controlled tempo.

"Over the years one of the successes we've had as a program is we could play
racehorse or smashmouth," Izzo said. "We have been able to play both."

But what Izzo and the Spartans couldn't possibly prepare for was just how hard
the Cavaliers contested  everything . With 14 minutes 9 seconds to go and the
Cavs leading by four, 36-32, Justin Anderson dove so hard for a loose ball he
slid under the chairs of the Michigan State coaches, driving the crowd to a
frenzy.

But all that effort also wore on the Cavs physically. With 16:20 left, Anthony
Gill had to leave the floor gimping. As the minutes grinded by, others seemed to
lose their legs a little, too. Suddenly, Payne penetrated inside to tomahawk a
couple of dunks that started a crucial run that spurred a seven-point lead for
the Spartans. The Cavaliers never quite recovered, but they never quit, either.
A deep corner three-pointer by Anderson gave them one last flare of hope, tying
the score with 1:49 to go.

Even when the hope was gone, and they had faded, the unmistakable air of pride
lingered. They belonged here. A day earlier, Bennett had been asked if he
thought his team was in the right company.

"Are we equipped to play against them well?" Bennett asked rhetorically, and
then answered his own question. "I think when we're playing at our best, our
style gives us a chance to beat the best. . . . When you play against high,
high-level opponents, does your system, does your style give you that chance?
And that's what we have tried to build and build."

sally.jenkins@washpost.com

For more by Sally Jenkins, go to washingtonpost.com/jenkins.

More NCAA tournament news

Feinstein: March Madness goes off-Broadway

Dayton continues its improbable run

Florida back in the round of eight

Wisconsin routs Baylor in West Region

Virginia is rare top-seeded underdog

At long last, Cavs on the upswing

Maryland women take a little time off

NCAA tournament bracket and historical database

Play The Bracket Challenge round-by-round

Photos: The best of the tournament | 68 teams, 68 facts

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


