                             1754 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 20, 2014 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Drug seizures down as migrant ï¬[#x201a]ow rises

BYLINE: Joshua Partlow;Nick Miroff

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 973 words

DATELINE: MCALLEN, TEX.


MCALLEN, Tex. - With the Border Patrol distracted by a surge of Central American
migrants crossing into south Texas, Mexican cartels have had an easier time
smuggling illegal drugs across the border, according to agents and state
officials here.

The arrival of large groups of women and children on the U.S. side of the Rio
Grande is pulling agents away from their patrol stations elsewhere along the
border, creating gaps in coverage that the traffickers can exploit, according to
Chris Cabrera, the Border Patrol union representative here.

The smugglers wait on the southern banks of the Rio Grande as migrant groups as
large as 250 wade across at dusk and turn themselves in to the Border Patrol, he
said. Then groups of single men proceed to cross under cover of darkness, hoping
to slip through.

"After that they send over the dope," Cabrera said, with U.S. officers too busy
to stop it.

Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott (R) and Gov. Rick Perry (R) have echoed the
complaints. In a letter this month to Department of Homeland Security Secretary
Jeh Johnson, Abbott asked for $30 million for law enforcement officers to fill
in the gaps because "we have grave concerns that dangerous cartel activity,
including narcotics smuggling and human trafficking, will go unchecked because
Border Patrol resources are stretched too thin."

The most recent statistics from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
show that narcotics seizures have fallen across the entire border with Mexico
this year, with the drop being larger in Texas than the average.

In Texas, combined seizures of marijuana, cocaine, heroin and methamphetamine
fell by 34 percent - from 374,812 to 246,976 kilograms - between Jan. 1 and June
14 compared with the same period last year. Seizures in Arizona and California
fell by 26 percent in each state. The decline was greatest in New Mexico - 62
percent - and the overall amount of drugs captured was also far lower than in
other states.

DEA officials caution that it is too early to say whether the rush of Central
American migrants is responsible for the falling drug interdiction numbers,
noting that the biggest narcotics loads in Texas are typically seized from
vehicles at highway checkpoints farther north, not on the banks of the Rio
Grande.

Customs and Border Protection spokesman Michael Friel said that his organization
has "no indication that drug interdiction operations have been negatively
impacted by our efforts to process the influx" of migrants. He said the Border
Patrol's Rio Grande sector has added more than 100 agents from other parts of
the border that have helped its anti-drug work.

As the humanitarian crisis intensifies, U.S. officials are raising the pressure
on their Mexican and Central American counterparts to halt the flow of migrants,
many of whom are driven by violence, poverty and the perception that they will
be allowed to stay if they reach U.S. soil. Secretary of State John F. Kerry
raised the issue during a recent visit to Mexico. And Vice President Biden was
headed to Guatemala on Friday to discuss a tightening of that country's border
with Mexico.

"Even if the VP says, 'Don't come,' it's going to be a tough sell," said Eric
Olson, associate director of the Latin America program at the Woodrow Wilson
Center in Washington. There is a sense in these countries that "this is your big
chance. If you want to get into the U.S., now is the time."

But migrants can cross the Mexico-Guatemala border easily, often in plain sight
of Mexican checkpoints. The boundary is in a sparsely populated region of thick
jungle and mountains and is lightly patrolled, without the high-tech scanners,
drones or imposing walls used on the U.S. border. The Mexican government does
not seem interested in or capable of investing heavily to militarize its
southern border, particularly with its security forces fighting drug cartels in
several parts of the country and the challenge of Central American migration
largely viewed as a problem for its wealthier northern neighbor.

"We're not going to do the work of the U.S. on the southern border," a senior
Mexican official said on the condition of anonymity to speak candidly.

Mexico eased its immigration enforcement with a 2011 law that granted migrants
new rights and no longer made it a crime to enter the country illegally. Mass
kidnappings and other attacks against migrants by criminal gangs have emboldened
activist groups to push Mexican officials to further expand protections for
those transiting the country en route to the United States.

Amalia GarcÃ­a Medina, a left-leaning congresswoman who is the head of the
migration commission in Mexico's lower house, said in an interview that she has
proposed the creation of a "migrant visa" that would give U.S.-bound travelers
safe passage and protection from deportation by the Mexican government for 30
days. A similar legislative proposal three years ago failed to pass.

"We shouldn't be criminalizing those who are present in Mexico without
documentation," she said in an interview, noting that the migrants' irregular
status is what often forces them to risk their lives on freight trains or allows
them to fall prey to abusive police officers. "We're trying to protect the
migrants from harm and guarantee their human rights."

Mexican immigration officials are among the lowest-paid law enforcement officers
in the country, and the federal government cannot afford to significantly
tighten up the border, said Gustavo Mohar, a former senior Mexican immigration
official.

"The government doesn't have the resources," he said. "And as you have proven in
the U.S., you have invested billions of dollars in the Mexico-U.S. border,
literally, and still people are able to avoid it."

joshua.partlow@washpost.com

nick.miroff@washpost.com

Gabriela Martinez in Mexico City contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


