                             1860 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                          September 10, 2014 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Islamic State stiffens resolve of war-weary N.H. voters

BYLINE: Philip Rucker

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: BEDFORD, N.H.


BEDFORD, N.H. - Mark Ilaria is a reluctant war booster.

All summer, the 57-year-old industrial-water-treatment salesman watched from his
home in this leafy pocket of New England as Islamic State terrorists became more
barbaric. After they persecuted Christians in Iraq, Ilaria, a Catholic, changed
his Facebook profile picture to an Arabic Nazarene symbol in solidarity with the
victims. And when he saw that they had beheaded two American journalists in
Syria, he decided something had to be done.

"As much as the pope says to pray, praying isn't enough," Ilaria said Tuesday.
"Just hit them with a drone and leave? That doesn't work either. I wish it did.
But this is not a video game."

Ilaria, a self-described political moderate who leans Republican, said he
doesn't have the stomach for another decade-long entanglement in another faraway
country. Yet he has concluded that the Islamic State group is such a serious a
threat to U.S. interests that sustained airstrikes in Iraq and Syria are
required.

"They're actually crucifying people," Ilaria said. "How do you negotiate with
these idiots? You've got to do something. . . . Obama does understand this. I
really think he does."

As President Obama prepares to address the nation Wednesday night on how the
United States should confront the turmoil in Iraq and Syria, Americans long
weary of war have quickly shifted in favor of decisive military action. A
Washington Post-ABC News poll this week  found that 71 percent of Americans
support airstrikes in Iraq, while 65 percent back airstrikes in Syria.

The sharp move in public opinion was apparent in interviews conducted in three
parts of the state with Ilaria and about two dozen other New Hampshire voters,
of all stripes, who cast ballots in Tuesday's primary elections.

Most voters interviewed here said the United States should begin airstrikes in
Syria and continue them in Iraq, where Obama has authorized limited action over
the past month. Many voters sharply criticized Obama's leadership because they
believe he has not been decisive enough in setting the military's course.

"I don't think he's showing any leadership," said Scott LaClair, 44, a
Republican and flight attendant from Nashua. "The United States looks as weak as
it's ever been in history."

But voters also voiced deep uneasiness with military action, even as they said
they had concluded that it is necessary.

"It's such a repugnant ideology, an evil ideology," said Jerry Hanaver, 65, a
Democrat and retired federal housing worker in Bedford, referring to the Islamic
State's doctrine. "If war is truly needed and warranted, then being weary of it
is not a reason not to go into it."

A few people interviewed here said they also support sending troops on the
ground in both countries.

Of those interviewed, only one - Francine Davis of Nashua - said the United
States should refrain from any military response. "Let the countries around
there deal with it," the 73-year-old retiree said.

Davis, a registered independent who said she voted for Obama in 2012, said she
fears possible repercussions from any U.S.-led military action. "I don't want
the United States to be bombed by these crazy people," she said. "That's a
monster over there."

These New Hampshire residents, like many other Americans, said they are tired of
war after more than a decade of conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan has extracted
so much blood and treasure. Many also fear that Obama is leading the country
into yet another long war, but they don't see a simple alternative.

"Those beheadings - it's almost like they're daring us to act," said Christine
Hall, 50, a construction engineer in Bedford. "I think we should go in quickly
and swiftly and get out of there. . . . It's tough. Part of me thinks we
shouldn't be the world's police. But if we aren't, who will be?"

Alfred Sanel, 76, a Republican and a retired Bedford businessman, said Americans
"can't talk our way through this. These people are animals, and the only way to
deal with animals is to send in more rabid animals. The only solution I know is
to send troops on the ground."

Sanel's wife, Barbara, 60, disagreed. "We're fighting an enemy that is not bound
by the rules of war," she said, while agreeing that "we have to do something."

In New Hampshire especially, the rising violence of the Islamic State is on the
forefront of people's minds. Both of the slain journalists have roots in this
small state: James Foley grew up in tranquil Rochester, where his family still
lives and where neighbors had been praying for his safe return for nearly two
years. The other journalist, Steven Sotloff, graduated from prep school in
Meriden, although he spent most of his childhood in Florida.

Jennifer Blackwood, 40, a stay-at-home mom in Bedford, said the beheading videos
"just make it so real. I have a 6-year-old, and he says: 'What's happening? What
are they doing? Are those bad men?' "

Barbara Deshaies, 68, a housecleaner in Bedford, said: "When they beheaded the
first guy, I was dumbfounded. I thought, 'Oh, my God, what's next?' Then, two
weeks later, another one. Now, anytime I go to a big event - like when I go to
NASCAR - I wonder, 'Are they going to bomb us today?'Ã¢[#x20ac][#x2c6]"

The threat has emerged as a major issue in the hard-fought Senate race between
Democratic incumbent Jeanne Shaheen and challenger Scott Brown, the winner of
Tuesday's Republican primary. Over the weekend, Brown released a harrowing
campaign video, "Reestablish America," in which the candidate says the Islamic
State "makes al-Qaeda look like Boy Scouts. . . .We're in trouble." On Monday,
Shaheen said in a Senate floor speech that "we must vigorously pursue those
responsible and bring them to justice."

New Hampshire's other senator, Kelly Ayotte, is one of the Republican Party's
loudest voices in favor of using military force against the Islamic State and
other threats.

Historically, New Hampshirites have been relatively hawkish, though not
belligerently so. There is a big military presence here, including the
Portsmouth Naval Shipyard              and a sizable veteran population. The
state's geographic position on the Atlantic Coast has made it vulnerable to
foreign attacks over the generations. During World War II, underwater nets were
erected to protect Portsmouth's harbor from German U-boats.

But New Hampshire also is a state that soured on war during George W. Bush's
second term. In 2006, Democratic candidates rode an antiwar wave to unseat
incumbent Republican congressmen in both of the state's congressional districts.

One of those Democrats, Paul Hodes, is now out of office, having given up his
seat in 2010 to run unsuccessfully against Ayotte. Stopping to chat outside his
voting place in downtown Concord on Tuesday, Hodes said he feels the country is
ready for "a strong military response" to the Islamic State terrorists.

"There is both reluctance and resolve that are at play here," Hodes said. "There
is reluctance about adventurism, but deep resolve and a sad realization that we
are in a long-term battle against a radicalized element."

Thomas Adams, 72, spent much of Tuesday morning holding signs for Democratic
candidates outside the Concord voting location, two blocks from the gold-domed
State House. Adams - an independent who said he voted for Obama - expressed
support for airstrikes in Syria, but he questioned whether they could extinguish
the threat.

"I'm not opposed to using weapons to defang that organization," he said, "but
that only removes the fangs."

philip.rucker@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


