                             1891 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 18, 2014 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

Boko Haram, Nigeria agree to cease-fire, o√¢[#x2c6][#x17e]cials say

BYLINE: Associated Press

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 482 words

DATELINE: ABUJA, NIGERIA


ABUJA, Nigeria - Nigeria's government and Boko Haram extremists have agreed to
an immediate cease-fire, officials said Friday, a move that could end five years
of insurgency that has killed thousands and has left hundreds of thousands in
Africa's most populous nation homeless.

The fate of more than 200 missing schoolgirls abducted by the Islamist
insurgents six months ago remains unclear. Maj. Gen. Chris Olukolade, a Defense
Ministry spokesman, said their release is being negotiated.

Boko Haram negotiators "assured that the schoolgirls and all other people in
their captivity are all alive and well," Mike Omeri, a government spokesman,
said at a news conference.

The chief of defense staff, Air Marshal Alex Badeh, announced the truce and
ordered his troops to immediately comply.

"Already, the terrorists have announced a cease-fire in furtherance of their
desire for peace. In this regard, the government of Nigeria has, in similar
vein, declared a cease-fire," Omeri said.

There was no immediate word from Boko Haram, which limits its announcements
almost exclusively to videos of its leader, Abubakar Shekau. Last year, when a
government minister tasked with negotiations announced an agreement, the group
quickly released a video denying it. At the time, Shekau said that whomever the
government negotiated with did not speak for him and that he would never talk to
infidels.

It could take days for word to get to fighters of Boko Haram, which is broken
into several groups. They include foreigners from neighboring countries Chad,
Cameroon and Niger, where the insurgents also have camps.

There have been unconfirmed reports that at least some of the girls have been
taken across borders and some were forced to marry their captors. A Boko Haram
video in May showed two of the girls explaining why they had converted from
Christianity to Islam.

Omeri confirmed that there had been direct negotiations this week about the
release of the abducted girls. Another official said the talks took place in
Chad. He spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to
talk to reporters.

Boko Haram had been demanding the release of detained extremists in exchange for
the girls. President Goodluck Jonathan originally said he could not support a
prisoner swap.

Boko Haram -  which can be translated as "Western education is sinful" -
attracted international condemnation with the April 15 kidnapping of 276 girls
and young women at a boarding school in the remote northeastern town of Chibok.

Their plight drew protests from around the world, with demands that the military
and government locate and free them.

The United States, Britain, France and China sent experts to help find the
girls, and U.S. drones flew over the area where they are believed to be held
captive. But months ago, Badeh said they feared that a military campaign to free
the girls would cause many of their deaths.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


