                             1885 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 8, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

A painstaking, near-perfect tale of grief

BYLINE: Ron Charles

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1113 words


Colm TÃ³ibÃ­n's most recent book was about a grieving woman, too. But she was
the mother of Jesus Christ, so the stakes seemed somewhat higher. In his new
novel, "Nora Webster," the Irish master has posed an entirely different
challenge for himself: Rather than imagining the angry rant of the Virgin who
changed human history, he describes a mother who never accomplishes anything
unusual, never claims any position in the affairs of the world at all.

It's far more believable and, ultimately, more miraculous.

Like some of his earlier novels, "Nora Webster" takes place in Wexford, Ireland,
where TÃ³ibÃ­n was raised. He started the book more than a decade ago but set it
aside, intimidated, he says, that it was "so personal." Over the years, he added
scene after scene, recalling the life of his widowed mother in the late 1960s
and early '70s. The result is a strikingly restrained novel about a woman
awakening from grief and discovering her own space, her own will. There's no
reason - except for TÃ³ibÃ­n's extraordinary skill - that this should be any
more interesting than watching clover wilt. It arrives as though in response to
Alice McDermott's call at this summer's National Book Festival for more literary
novels about ordinary women, women who are not avenging angels or bludgeoned
victims but fully realized characters who become "someone" through the force of
a great writer's insight.

So readers in search of flaming buildings and libidos should turn the page now.
In this incorrigibly subtle novel, TÃ³ibÃ­n is writing for "people on whom
nothing is lost." The story eventually includes references to the Troubles, but
those frightening confrontations are mostly far away, spotted on television,
considered in worried conversations over tea. Instead, the action of "Nora
Webster" is composed of tender moments of quiet triumph and despair: the drama
of a thoughtful family emerging from bereavement.

In the opening pages, Nora is growing impatient with the bossy sympathy and
"hectoring tone" of her well-meaning neighbors. "You must be fed up of them,"
one drones on cluelessly as Nora tries to get away. "I don't know how you put up
with it." For this 44-year-old widow, so determined to maintain her dignity and
privacy, it's a struggle to grieve in a village where people remember your birth
and know the plot in the graveyard where you'll eventually be buried. She feels
cramped by everyone's pity: "It was solid, as the outer wall of a vault is
solid," she realizes, "built to withstand rather than support." The recent death
of her husband - a beloved schoolteacher - has transformed her and her family
into a simulacrum of their old selves. "They had come to behave," TÃ³ibÃ­n
writes, "as if everything were normal, as if nothing were really missing. They
had learned to disguise how they felt. She, in turn, had learned to recognize
danger signs, thoughts that would lead to other thoughts. She measured her
success with the boys by how much she could control her feelings."

But, of course, that control is elusive; many things are missing now, including
her husband's income, and no one in the family knows exactly what to do. Nora is
still traumatized by her husband's agonizing illness and death, shockingly
mismanaged by the local doctor. "When she asked herself what she was interested
in, she had to conclude that she was interested in nothing at all. . . . She
wondered if she would ever again be able to have a normal conversation and what
topics she might be able to discuss with ease and interest." Her younger son has
begun wetting the bed. Her older one - based on the author's 12-year-old self -
has grown withdrawn and developed a stammer.

TÃ³ibÃ­n knows the claustrophobic dimensions of this world, but he also
appreciates the vanished courtesies and intimacies it offered residents. That
culture existed - and exists again in these chapters - far removed from our
therapeutic age. "It will be all right," an old nun tells Nora. "It is a small
town, and it will guard you." Nora doesn't load up on advice books or whisk her
sons to urologists and speech therapists. They rely, instead, upon their own
kindness and determination. Given a little peace and space, Nora knows "she
would work out how she was going to live."

And so she does, slowly and without tears, across pages that never succumb to a
single melodramatic or sentimental phrase. Much of the plot involves Nora going
back, after 21 years away, to her first employers, a ridiculously imperious
couple who pretend they rule the village. "Returning to work in that office
belonged to a memory of being caged," TÃ³ibÃ­n writes, but Nora is not one for
self-pity or shame. When a rude co-worker must be put in her place, she does it.
Other challenges follow, some of them gently comic. Determined to reenter the
world, she gets her hair dyed for the first time: "When it was finished, she
knew that anyone who saw her on the way home would think that she had lost her
mind." No matter. Again and again, Nora finds herself more capable and resilient
than she ever realized. When her son's headmaster makes an unfair decision, she
rises up like an Irish mother bear and threatens to hurl down "a widow's curse."

An autobiographical novel about one's emotionally rigid mother sounds like an
opportunity for psychic revenge. But there's nothing like that in this story,
which portrays Nora with tremendous sympathy and understanding. Here is a woman
doing the best she can, learning to care for her children even as she begins to
think of herself as possessing her own interests, giving herself permission to
pursue artistic pleasures for their own sake. TÃ³ibÃ­n would probably cringe at
the idea, but there's something implicitly didactic about this novel: Its barely
undulating plot and exactingly modulated tone serve as a kind of guide to living
without excess drama. Nora never breaks down; her children never lash out; none
of them spray their grief on Twitter (they don't even have a phone in the
house). It's a poignant reminder of a time when people responded to hardship
with dignity instead of indignation.

One evening, Nora lets the boys stay up late with her to watch Ingrid Bergman in
"Gaslight."

"What's the film?" the younger one asks.

"It's about a woman in a house," she tells them.

"Is that all?"

Yes. But in the right hands, that's enough.

ron.charles@washpost.com

Charles is the editor of Book World. His reviews appear in Style every
Wednesday. You can follow him on Twitter @RonCharles. On Oct. 15 at 7 p.m.,
TÃ³ibÃ­n will be at Politics and Prose, 5015 Connecticut Ave. NW, Washington.
Call 202-364-1919 for information.

NORA WEBSTER

By Colm TÃ³ibÃ­n

Scribner. 373 pp. $27

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


