                             1879 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 30, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

Report says Islamic State fight will cost U.S. billions

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 695 words


The United States has probably spent between $780 million and $930 million in
its military campaign against the Islamic State militant group, and is likely to
pay between $200 million and $320 million per month going forward if the number
of service members on the ground grows to 2,000, according to a report published
Monday.

Those costs would grow to between $350 million and $570 million per month if the
pace of the airstrikes increases and 5,000 U.S. troops are deployed, according
to the report, released by the independent Center for Strategic and Budgetary
Assessments in Washington.

On an annual basis, lower-intensity air operations could cost $2.4 billion to
$3.8 billion per year, the report said. The annual cost would jump to between
$4.2 billion and $6.8 billion if the pace of airstrikes increases and is
sustained.

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel said Friday that the money for the strikes is
coming out of the Overseas Contingency Operations budget, but "we are going to
require additional funding from Congress as we go forward."

The report was released after the United States reported completing about 220
airstrikes in Iraq since Aug. 8 and about 50 in Syria since Sept. 23. On Monday,
the U.S. military announced that along with partner nations, it had launched
eight airstrikes in Syria. Separately, the United States carried out three
airstrikes in Iraq.

In addition to the airstrikes, the U.S. Navy has launched at least 47 Tomahawk
cruise missiles - each costing more than $1 million - into Syria. Most of those
were aimed at targets affiliated with the Khorasan group, which U.S. officials
say is affiliated with al-Qaeda and was planning "imminent" attacks against the
United States and other Western nations.

Airstrikes have been conducted thus far by fighter jets, "attack aircraft" like
the AC-130 gunship, drones and the B-1B bomber.

Militants with the Islamic State are adopting new tactics after more than a
month of being hit with U.S.-led airstrikes in Iraq and Syria, traveling in
groups less often and moving less freely, an Air Force general said Monday.

"The bottom line is air power's targeted actions are disrupting ISIL's command
and control, their logistics and infrastructure and their freedom of movement,"
said Maj. Gen. Jeff Harrigian, using one of the acronyms for the militant group
that still has control of broad areas of both countries.

The Islamic State once traveled frequently in long columns of vehicles, massing
forces before attacking towns, military bases and other targets. That occurs
less frequently now because it is easy for U.S. forces to spot them with aerial
surveillance.

"They are a smart adversary, and they have seen that that's not effective for
their survival, so they are now dispersing themselves to allow themselves
situations to be more survivable, if you will," Harrigian said, adding that it
"requires us to work harder to locate them, and then develop the situation to
appropriately target them."

Harrigian said that the bulk of the strikes - about 74 percent - have been
carried out by the Air Force.

To coordinate airstrikes in Iraq, the United States has joint terminal air
controllers in military operations centers that communicate with Iraqi and
Kurdish troops who are out in the field, the general said. The American JTACs
decide what kind of action is appropriate based on the information they receive,
Harrigian said. That does not occur in Syria, however, suggesting that the
United States and its partners are striking the Islamic State based on aerial
surveillance alone.

There are believed to be more than 1,000 U.S. service members on the ground -
many of them Special Operations troops - and the United States is preparing to
deploy a 500-soldier headquarters to Iraq from the U.S. Army's 1st Infantry
Division in Fort Riley, Kan.

The United States is starting to get new help in the fight against the Islamic
State. Partner Arab nations have been carrying out airstrikes in Syria with U.S.
oversight, and France, Britain and other nations have recently pledged support
for the campaign in Iraq or have already joined it.

dan.lamothe@washpost.com

Ã¯...OE  More at washingtonpost.com/ checkpoint

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


