                             192 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                            December 2, 2013 Monday

In Thailand, a Drone's Eye View of Protests

BYLINE: CHRISTINE HAUSER

LENGTH: 896 words



HIGHLIGHT: For the first time, widespread use of the tiny devices give an aerial
perspective on Thailand&#8217;s deep civil unrest.


[Video: TheCyberJom, a YouTube account, posted video of street protests in
Thailand recorded by a drone. Watch on YouTube.]

Thailand's news media outlets have been increasingly using small, unmanned
flying gadgets that give them a bird's-eye view of the protests in the streets
of their capital. As my colleague Thomas Fuller writes, the miniature drones
have circulated videos of the battles, including one between riot police outside
the prime minister's office and protesters attacking the barricades.

This is the first time that drones have been used so widely during protests in
Thailand, which is now in the throes of its deepest civil unrest in three years.


[Video: Video of protests at Government House on Dec. 1. Watch on YouTube.]
[Video: Footage of a street in the protest area and apparent evacuation of an
injured protester. Watch on YouTube.]

Used sporadically in Thailand to take images of floods, festivals and of
previous unrest, the tiny drones fitted with cameras are particularly handy now
that some of Bangkok's streets are choked with tear gas and punctuated by
gunfire.

They take off vertically and are powered aloft by helicopter-type rotor blades -
not unlike the drones Jeff Bezos, Amazon's founder, floated as possible delivery
vehicles. In Thailand, many local news organizations use the drones to grab new
angles or to get some perspective on the rioting crowds, which either stretch
down broad avenues or cluster in small groups.

While always hard to pin down, protest crowd numbers are an important estimate
that can range broadly and imprecisely. In general, they can be greatly
exaggerated for propaganda purposes in any conflict, even to the extent that
still photography images are altered to make demonstrations look better attended
than they really were.

It is not yet clear what, if any, effect the drone coverage is having on the
course of the protests.

On the street, some journalists have been mingling with the protesters
unimpeded, while others have been confronted and beaten, as a Human Rights Watch
report published last week said.

It noted that journalists were being attacked by opposition groups, citing one
example of when they surrounded television stations or attacked a photographer:

The protests have targeted journalists considered supportive of the government.
On November 25, opposition protesters assaulted Nick Nostitz, a German freelance
journalist, after remarks by a speaker at a mass rally. According to witnesses
and news footage, a former Democrat Party member of parliament, Chumpol Junsai,
announced to thousands of protesters in front of the Bangkok Metropolitan Police
headquarters that Nostitz was affiliated with the pro-government United Front
for Democracy against Dictatorship (UDD), known at the "Red Shirts," and urged
them to chase him out.

Several protesters immediately attacked Nostitz, punching him several times in
the face, until police officers intervened and rescued him. Shortly thereafter,
a pro-Democrat Party cable TV station, the Blue Sky Channel, posted Nostiz's
profile on its Facebook page, and his photograph has been spread widely on
antigovernment social media sites, raising concerns for his safety.

, a writer based in Bangkok, wrote on his website last month about the use of
drones to augment his travel writing in Thailand using the Phantom, a device
which can be fitted with a GoPro or built-in camera.

Mr. Barrow wrote in a recent post that the devices have also been used in
reporting on floods and festivals, in addition to the latest unrest for which he
recirculated an aerial image of protest crowds at Bangkok's Democracy Monument
last month.

Credit:[#xe2a][#xe21][#xe40][#xe01][#xe35][#xe22][#xe23][#xe15][#xe34][#xe22][#x
e4c] [#xe24][#xe17][#xe18][#xe34][#xe4c][#xe1a][#xe39][#xe25][#xe22][#xe4c] |
[#xe20][#xe32][#xe1e][#xe21][#xe38][#xe21][#xe2a][#xe39][#xe07][#xe08][#xe32][#x
e01] Drone
[#xe40][#xe27][#xe17][#xe35][#xe23][#xe32][#xe0a][#xe14][#xe33][#xe40][#xe19][#x
e34][#xe19] 6-11-56 http://t.co/rXd3lutgbN

- Wichatorn Wongphan (@Pai_NTV)6 Nov 13

As the protests intensified over the weekend, at least three people were killed,
and as of late Monday, the government reported that the total number of people
injured since Friday had risen to 201, Mr. Fuller reported.

On Monday, Mr. Barrow and others shared on Twitter a sense of the difficulties
of working in Thailand.
Some journalists reporting today that the mood among protesters has changed &
they seem more aggressive towards foreign journalists #Bangkok- Richard Barrow
(@RichardBarrow)2 Dec 13Sky News UK crossed live to #Bangkok. Started calm but
then heard gunshots & had to cut short due to tear gas http://t.co/OqyF5eECqV-
Richard Barrow (@RichardBarrow)2 Dec 13Jonathan Samuels, one of the
correspondents to which Mr. Barrow was referring, wrote:Have left very volatile
protest area for safety reasons #thaiprotests- Jonathan Samuels
(@jonathansamuels)2 Dec 13A photographer also confirmed that he had been
confronted by protesters.Yes, as mentioned by @aleursic a couple of protesters
grabbed hold of me after I took pictures of petrol soaked projectiles being
(1/2) ...- Will Baxter (@willbaxterphoto)2 Dec 13... thrown. They demanded I
delete the pics. I refused, so they called me a "spy". Was able to leave & move
on to another site. #Thailand- Will Baxter (@willbaxterphoto)2 Dec 13

     ·    Video of Police Brutality in Kiev Fuels Rage
     ·    Body of Nazi War Criminal Moved to Airport in Rome After Clashes
     ·    Rampage in Moscow Unfolds on Camera
     ·    Saudi Women Drive, Despite Ban, and Find Some Support on the Kingdom's
          Roads
     ·    Police Officer in Brazil Jokes on Facebook About Breaking Truncheon
          Over Protester


LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


