                             1938 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             August 31, 2014 Sunday
                               SUN SCENE Edition

Love, loss and history on stage

BYLINE: Lisa Kennedy

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 920 words


"All the Rage"and "The Tricky Part"

Sept. 6 Oct. 5 at Curious Theatre Company

Playwright/Performer Martin Moran returns to his hometown with a reprise of his
Obie award winning, one man show, "The Tricky Part," about confronting the
church counselor he had a "relationship" with when he was 12 and his follow up,
"All the Rage." In the latter, Moran recounts his travels in search of an anger
that is not natural to him. Moran's stint at Curious marks the return of a
native son who has plenty to say.

303 623 0524, curioustheatre.org

"Memphis"

Sept. 9 28 at the Arvada Center Mainstage

What a pleasure that this isn't a lazy jukebox musical instead, this blues
honoring show about a white deejay and the black singer he champions, then falls
for, comes by way of Bon Jovi founder David Bryan and playwright Joe DiPrieto.

720 898 7200, arvadacenter.org

"Ludlow, 1914"

Sept. 11 28 at Dusty Loo Bon Vivant Theater, Colorado Springs

Arguably the most promising collaboration of the theater season finds
TheatreWorks uniting with Denver's LIDA Project for a multifaceted work that
marks the 100 year anniversary of the attack on the striking coal miners camp in
Southern Colorado that left two dozen dead including two women and 11 children.

719 255 3232 or theatreworkscs.org

"Grounded"

Sept. 11 28 at the Avenue Theater

Boulder Ensemble Theatre Company and artistic director Stephen Weitz don't want
Denverites to fear U.S. 36. BETC plans on showing just how easy it is to travel
back and forth between the culturally savvy cities when it brings George Brant's
one woman play about a former combat pilot turned drone operator working in Las
Vegas to Denver's Avenue Theater. Laura Norman so good in BETC's "The Ghost
Writer" stars.

303 321 5925 or betc.org/grounded

"Once on This Island"

Sept. 12 Oct. 5 at Aurora Fox Arts Center, Aurora

Three reasons to see the Fox's 2014 2015 opener: 1) After her Henry Award
winning stage debut, singer SuCh returns to the Fox mainstage as the lead in
this Caribbean fable of star crossed love and sacrifice. 2) Rosa Guy's 1985
novel was reimagined by musical theater titans Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty
who tag teamed "Seussical" and Tony Award garnering "Ragtime." 3) The show's
director choreographer is Candy Brown, one time dancer for Broadway legends Bob
Fosse, Michael Bennett and Hal Prince.

303 739 1970 or aurorafox.org

"Dylan Went Electric"

Sept. 12 Oct. 19 at Miners Alley, Golden

The intimate Golden theater pulls back the curtain on Bob Dylan and the
Greenwich Village folk music scene of 1969. Jim Hunt directs the world premiere
of Denver playwright Josh Hartwell's show about friendship, creativity and a
watershed moment in time.

303 935 3044 or minersalley.com

"The Year of Magical Thinking"

Sept. 18 Oct. 5, Bas Bleu, Fort Collins

Consider Bas Bleu's remounting of its production of Joan Didion's play a return
worth returning to, even though it was just onstage last summer. Wendy Ishii
portrays the famed journalist in this account of the death of her husband,
writer John Gregory Dunne.

970 498 8949 or basbleu.org

"The Unsinkable Molly Brown"

Previews Sept. 12 18, Runs Sept. 19 Oct. 26, the Denver Performing Arts
Complex's Stage Theatre

In movie parlance, this Denver Center Theatre Company season opener might be
called a reboot. If we were fond of lame puns and we are we'd joke that bringing
Meredith Willson's 1960 musical to the stage is a titanic undertaking. Instead
we'll merely assert that Colorado heroine Molly Brown in the hands of director
choreographer Kathleen Marshall and writer Dick Scanlon with new songs from
Willson's songbook should be a bold and buoyant journey.

303 893 4100 or denvercenter.org

Boulder International Fringe Festival

Sept. 17 28, Dairy Center for the Arts and other venues throughout Boulder

This 12 day extravaganza of the eclectic, experimental and wild includes works
by local theatrical tinkerers like Boulder's Band of Toughs ("I Miss My MTV")
and visitors like former Bay Area journalist David Kleinberg ("Hey, Hey LBJ!")
and South Africa's Shirley Kirschmann ("Whenever I am sad or struck by tragedy I
smile to myself because I know with time it will become fantastic comic
material.")

303 803 5643 or

boulderfringe.com

"Rattlesnakes"

Oct. 9 26, Springs Ensemble Theatre, Colorado Springs

Brit playwright Graham Farrow's drama unfolds in a hotel room where a gigolo has
an unplanned and menacing date with the husbands of the women he's been
servicing.

719 357 3080 or springsensembletheatre.org

Dracula

Oct. 9 Nov. 2, Fine Arts Center, Colorado Springs

It seems like there hasn't been a theater season without a play or adaptation by
native son Steven Deitz, who now splits his time between Seattle and Austin,
Texas. As it should be. Deitz is prolific and good. This time out, Deitz has
taken seriously the dark, bloody mood of Bram Stoker's iconic novel.

719 634 5583 or csfineartscenter.org.

"Kindertransport"

Oct. 30 Dec. 7, Mizel Arts and Culture Center

Theatre Or and the Mizel Arts and Culture Center kick off the JAAMM Fest with
English playwright Diane Samuels' drama about the evacuation of Jewish children
from Germany. This year marks the 75th anniversary of the British program that
relocated the "kinder" to England in the wake of Kristallnacht and escalating
anti Semitic violence throughout Germany. Before beginning its run, the show
will honor local Kindertransport survivors among them theater champion Henry
Lowenstein on Oct. 22.

303 316 6360 or maccjcc.org

Lisa Kennedy: 303 954 1567, lkennedy@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bylisakennedy

LOAD-DATE: September 03, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Arvada Center presents "Memphis, The Musical," with Jim Hogan as
Huey and Aisha Jackson as Felicia. Provided by P. Switzer Photography
Margaret Kasahara in "Ludlow, 1914," a collaboration between TheatreWorks and
the LIDA Project. Provided by TheatreWorks
Claire Patton, left, Lucia Rich will perform "The Awkward Art of Flying" at the
Boulder International Fringe Festival. Provided by Boulder International Fringe
Festival

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


