                             195 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            October 2, 2014 Thursday

Drones vs. Kidneys: Google Autofill on the Economy

BYLINE: CONOR DOUGHERTY

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 591 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â A New York brokerage took a novel approach to studying what people
are searching for on Google. We certainly spend a lot of time thinking about
television bachelors.


If one were looking for a national collective conscience, they could do worse
than Google's autofill feature - that thing where Google's search engine tries
to guess what you're looking for by "autofilling" a few letters of a query into
a fully formed question.

Take a recent search for "Who Is?" It suggests Americans are very interested in
ISIS, the brutal group of Sunni militants in Iraq and Syria, as well as the
Bachelor, the reality TV show where a group of women compete to marry some guy
they don't know.

With the third quarter now behind us, Nicholas Colas, chief market strategist at
ConvergEx Group, a New York broker-dealer, used autofill and other "off the
grid" indicators, including Google Trends, to see how Americans feel about the
economy.

"Every quarter we take a break from all the standard economic indicators to look
at a range of alternative data. The purpose here is to pose the question: Does
the consensus view of the economy square with what real people do in their daily
lives?" he wrote in a note to clients.

Some conclusions from autofill: Don't be surprised if Dad comes home with a new
drone and one kidney.

Mr. Colas has been tracking Google autofill data for a while, and for most of
the last three years the top three positions for the query, "I want to buy..."
have been won by "a house," "a car" and "stock."

The fourth spot tends to vary with the news cycle, and in past quarters has
included things like "a gun," "a dog" and "Facebook stock."

This quarter the fourth spot went to "a drone."

Maybe that shouldn't be surprising, given the number of drones in the news
lately. Google announced a drone delivery effort dubbed Project Wing in the
third quarter. The Times also reported on NASA's efforts to create an
air-traffic control system for drone aircraft

The prospect of drones landing in backyards and peering into bedroom windows has
freaked a lot of people out. Speaking about drones in September, Supreme Court
Justice Sonia Sotomayor told an an Oklahoma City audience: "That type of
technology has to stimulate us to think about what is it that we cherish in
privacy and how far we want to protect it and from whom."

One thing people do not seem to cherish are their kidneys: "kidney" was the
third autofill option - after "car" and "house" - for "I want to sell my..." Of
course, this could simply be morbid curiosity. In an interview, Mr. Colas said
"hair" has also ranked high in past quarters.

"The point is not so much to develop an alternative paradigm of economic
analysis as it is to poke and prod at the consensus we all embrace. After all,
can the U.S. economy be doing all that well if (I want to sell a) 'Kidney' is a
common autofill?" Mr. Colas wrote.

Looking beyond autofill to Google Trends data, Mr. Colas found that interest in
gold coins, which hit at a post-financial-crisis low, suggests people are
feeling much better about the nation's financial system. But many Americans are
still worried about money and food, as interest in food stamps ticked higher
from earlier in the year.

All in all, alternative indicators point to an economy continuing to mend, but
mending so slowly that people still have severe anxieties about the future.
That's the same conclusion one would come to by looking at more traditional
indicators like consumer confidence or the government's monthly jobs report.

"But it feels like we got here by drone, with a different perspective of the
same picture," Mr. Colas concluded. "At least we didn't have to sell our kidney
to see it."

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


