                             1941 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            October 9, 2014 Thursday
                                  UNK Edition

Recommendations from the report on the Aurora theater shooting

SECTION: Z; Pg. 0Z

LENGTH: 1593 words


The TriData report made more than 80 "recommendations for the future based on
the lessons learned."

Suggestion for theaters (2 items)

* To improve patron safety, theaters should consider putting alarms on emergency
or secondary exits, and preferably monitor them by video surveillance. Having a
voice communications system to inform people about emergencies also is important
in an emergency. Additionally, theater complexes should be able to quickly
switch off the movies and turn on the lights in each theater, to facilitate
exiting and improving visibility in an emergency.

* Inform the public on appropriate measures if caught in a shooting situation.

Re: police response (23 items)

* Revise pre incident planning and training for an active shooter or bomber.

* Plan and practice unified command for complex incidents.

* Clearly identify who is the incident commander

* Train several more fire or police personnel as SWAT paramedics.

* Keep paths open for ambulances, and discuss access issues with fire/EMS as
they occur.

* In addition to wearing protective vests, uniformed officers should carry
active shooter armor kits

* Officers assigned to patrol should have a tactical medical kit (like IFAKs).

* Police should broaden their training on use of gas masks, if not already done.

* Reduce noise and light stressors at incident scenes as soon as possible.

* Stage mutual aid assistance forces when their help is not needed for the
active shooting portion of the incident.

* Develop agreements for air support for critical incidents; consider
procurement of a low cost Remotely Piloted Vehicle (drone)

* Activate the ICS and establish a unified command as soon as possible.

* Designate someone not involved in the incident to be responsible for the
remainder of the city when the senior commander is focused on a major incident.

* Locate the command post at a safe distance and maintain a scene safety zone.

* As the incident unfolds, a police command officer not directly involved in
management of the incident should be designated as the Safety Officer

* Specialized command vehicles or trailers should be reserved for commanders to
use, and not be taken over by public information officers

* Officers can make use of "smart phone" note taking and video capability.

* Harmonize designations for building sides.

* Consider use of mutual aid resources to reduce lab overloads.

* When possible, fatigued officers exposed to high levels of trauma should be
relieved by officers who were off duty when the incident occurred.

* Defer report writing until officers have had time to recover.

* Make sure the scene is secure

* Be prepared to set up officer, firefighter and EMS decontamination and
hydration stations.

Re: Paris Street apartment (3 items)

* Make the size of the safe area match the threat.

* Know the available bomb disposal resources.

* Plan for interpretation services in real time.

Re: emergency medical services (14 items)

* During a mass casualty incident, command should announce when the scene is
reasonably safe for EMS to proceed

* As noted earlier, there needs to be an Incident Safety Officer quickly
appointed who should pay particular attention to the access or egress of
emergency vehicles

* The Incident Commander should quickly appoint a Staging Area Manager

* Dispatch and incident commanders should consider calling for multiple fire or
EMS units as strike teams or task forces when large numbers of responders or
equipment are needed

* When access is difficult, police, fire or other agencies may have to
physically guide ambulance units into the scene.

* In situations where immediate transport of patients is warranted, use of
police or other emergency vehicles is appropriate when ambulances are not
immediately available

* Ensure that the new active shooter protocol remains a "living document"

* Aurora public safety providers should adopt a triage identification system
that includes color coded triage ribbons for patients

* Continue to implement NIMS and ICS throughout the Aurora public safety system.

* The AFD should further integrate RMA into the ICS process,

* EMS ICS position vests should be used to identify those placed in key ICS
positions.

* Appoint Treatment Dispatch Managers under ICS

* Pay closer attention to completing ICS forms and transportation records

* Aurora Police Department should consider expanding the EMS scope of practice
for police officers, especially for gunshot wounds

Re: public safety communications (20 items)

* Foster more integration of planning and exercises among public safety
communications, fire and police

* The Communications Department should hold regular inter department
interoperability communications drills with all three agencies police, fire, and
public safety communications.

* Empower telecommunicators to use their judgment in a large scale event, and to
suspend the usual protocols when they are inefficient or troublesome.

* In a mass casualty incident, there is likely to be a second surge of calls
from family, friends and media following the initial emergency call surge.

* The Communications Department should prepare to provide relief to its
telecommunicators for a long duration incident.

* As recommended in other chapters, establish a unified police, fire and EMS
command, or at least face to face communications at a command center, as early
as possible

* The radio system needs to be reconfigured to make it simpler to use its
interoperative capabilities.

* The scan feature on radios is not effective during a critical incident;

* Consider installing both police and fire radios in police and fire command
vehicles.

* A backup inter department communications systems such as cell phone direct
connect should be considered.

* If not already available, consider purchasing a small number of satellite
phones that do not rely on cell phone sites and will work at almost any
location.

* Provide a way for mutual aid units to monitor Aurora police talk groups.

* Dispatchers should be empowered and encouraged to, with tact, recommend or
suggest and, if needed, direct Incident Commanders to undertake actions in
support of the management of an operation

* Do not rely on mobile terminals in vehicles for critical incident
communications

* If not already done, program into the Aurora Intergraph CAD system all Denver
fire/EMS units, private ambulances, and public medical care facilities.

* The Communications Department now has a combined police fire major incident
dispatching area

* Communication Department staff, as well as police, fire and EMS personnel,
must be versed in the use of NIMS and ICS,

* After this incident, the city acquired a toll free number

* CISM needs to be available to telecommunicators and their managers as well as
to first responders.

* A debriefing for Communications Department personnel should be conducted soon
after a major event.

Re: public information (5 items)

* The processes that the city used to manage and provide public information
should be institutionalized in its major incident response plans.

* Establish a Public Information Command Post remote from the crime scene in a
major incident.

* A Joint Information Center should be established when there is a major
incident or other disaster

* Decisions or planned information actions should be well coordinated in advance
with other affected city departments

Re: incident command (6 items)

* Having the senior police and fire command personnel operating at a single
incident command post would greatly enhance inter agency communications.

* A unified command approach would likely be the best option

* Multi casualty (EMS) Branch. Staff with EMS Officers from mutual aid agencies

* A staging area should be designated early in the incident

* Equipping police ICS personnel with command boards, ICS forms, and similar
materials

Re: emergency operations center (3 items)

* The City of Aurora should consider changing its organizational structure for
emergency management

* The OEM Coordinator should be notified as soon as a critical incident occurs

* There were not enough phones and computers for all the representatives in the
operations centers, and the communications were not recorded since many people
were using their personal devices

Re: aftermath (11 items)

* Do not allow even good hearted volunteers without family assistance training
to have easy access to families and victims

* Once a family advocate is assigned to a victim or family, it is best not to
eliminate that advocate, even if another advocate needs to be added per legal
protocols.

* Be prepared to explain to families of victims why identification of the
deceased takes so long

* Include in a mass casualty plan options for receiving and distributing large
amounts of donations likely to flow in to help victims

* Victim Services should consider scheduling leave so that there are not too
many advocates on leave at the same time.

* There should be a lead advocate assigned to each hospital that receives
victims, to coordinate all victim advocates responding to that location.

* In a major incident, designate an area near but not immediately adjacent to
the family reunification center where people can gather without interfering

* Designate a special area where clergy can assemble within the family
reunification center.

* Establish one central file on victim information to avoid multiple files with
conflicting or incomplete information.

* Promote the successful concept of assigning PIOs to families of the deceased
victims

* Do not require first responders who worked at a traumatic incident to work
their immediate next shift, especially if those become 12 hour shifts.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


