                             1995 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (The Caucus)

                           November 9, 2013 Saturday

Sunday Breakfast Menu, Nov. 10

BYLINE: JADA F. SMITH

SECTION: US; politics

LENGTH: 448 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey handily won re-election on Tuesday,
and will continue his victory lap with an appearance on four of this
week&#8217;s Sunday shows. Some Republicans are looking to the governor as the
future of their party, especially after such a strong win in a Democratic state.



 Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey handily won re-election on Tuesday, and will
continue his victory lap with an appearance on four of this week's Sunday shows.
Some Republicans are looking to the governor as the future of their party,
especially after such a strong win in a Democratic state.

Governor Christie will appear on NBC's "Meet the Press," "Fox News Sunday,"
CBS's "Face the Nation," and ABC's "This Week." Viewers can expect to hear what
his plans are for his second term, and his thoughts on the current state of the
Republican Party. He may also hint at his plans for the 2016 presidential
election.

Senator Robert J. Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey and chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, will also be on "This Week" to discuss the
negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program. Gov. Rick Perry of Texas will
appear on the show as well.

Leon E. Panetta, the former defense secretary and Central Intelligence Agency
director, will be on "Face the Nation" after Mr. Christie, giving his take on
whether the Pentagon or the C.I.A. should oversee the drone program.

CNN's "State of the Union" will feature a one-on-one with Senator Lindsey
Graham, Republican of South Carolina, as he discusses the breakthrough on
nuclear talks with Iran and the "60 minutes" report on the Benghazi attack that
it was forced to admit was wrong. Later, Representative Debbie Wasserman
Schultz, Democrat of Florida and the chairwoman of the Democratic National
Committee, will speak up about the problems with the federal health care website
Healthcare.gov as her party members continue to put pressure on President Obama.
Then, after a major gubernatorial loss in Virginia alongside a big win in New
Jersey, Reince Priebus, the Republican National Committee chairman, will be on
to assure his base that the party knows what it's doing as they look to 2014 and
2016.

Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, will talk about the recent plagiarism
allegations against him on Univision's "Al Punto." Representative David G.
Valadao, Republican of California, will discuss his plan to revive the
immigration debate in his party and to get more of his colleagues on board with
reformation. Xiomara Castro de Zelaya, a presidential candidate in Honduras,
will be on the show as well. She will sit down for an in-depth interview on her
campaign promises and the role her husband, the former president of Honduras,
would have, if any, in her potential administration.

C-SPAN's "Newsmakers" will feature an interview with Senator Charles E.
Grassley, Republican of Iowa, about Congress's inquiry into the health care law
and the future role of the Tea Party following Tuesday's elections.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


