                             199 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 1, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

Pakistani leader warns U.S. on NATO supplies

BYLINE: Tim Craig;Haq Nawaz Khan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 796 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - The chief political leader in Pakistan's Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa province threatened Thursday to choke off key NATO supply routes if
U.S. drone strikes on Pakistan continue, setting up a potential clash within the
country's national government.

Imran Khan, whose Movement for Justice party controls the northwestern province,
said he feared that continued drone strikes would undermine efforts by Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif to hold peace talks with the Pakistani Taliban. Sharif
said Thursday that dialogue has begun, though Taliban officials stress that the
process will quickly unravel if the U.S. drone program is not halted. The latest
suspected strike occurred Wednesday night.

"If drone attacks are carried out during peace talks with Taliban, NATO supplies
will be stopped," Khan told reporters at a news conference in the eastern city
of Lahore.

It was the second time in less than a week that Khan has suggested that local
officials could impede NATO convoys passing through northwestern Pakistan to and
from the war in Afghanistan. U.S. and NATO officials had no immediate comment,
but Khan's threat comes as the U.S. military plans to transport hundreds of
millions of dollars' worth of equipment on Pakistani highways ahead of the
planned withdrawal of forces by the end of next year.

The supply routes were established when U.S. and NATO forces began pouring into
landlocked Afghanistan after the Taliban's ouster in late 2001, but the routes
were closed for seven months between late 2011 and 2012 after a U.S. airstrike
on the border of the two countries killed 24 Pakistani soldiers. Pakistan
allowed the NATO convoys to restart in July 2012 after Hillary Rodham Clinton,
then secretary of state, apologized for the incident.

The U.S. military is moving out the bulk of its equipment from Afghanistan via
those routes, the most cost-effective option. The NATO convoys pass through
either Khyber Pakhtunkhwa or the southwestern province of Baluchistan on their
way to the port city of Karachi.

Both routes have been vulnerable to attacks from militants, and shipments have
at times stalled at the border in recent months because of corruption and the
Afghan government's insistence that the United States pay millions of dollars in
customs fees. But Pakistan's government has an agreement with the United States
allowing the transports through 2015, and Pakistani security officials help
secure the routes.

Although Sharif has also tried in the past to tie the supply routes to the drone
issue, he has stressed since taking office in June that he hopes for improved
relations with the United States. If Khan's provincial government follows
through on its threat, analysts say, Sharif will have little choice but to step
in and exert his constitutional authority to oversee foreign affairs.

"The federal government would be embarrassed and be ina very unpalatable
situation of having to act," said Khalid Aziz, former chief secretary of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa. "It would lead to a political crisis."

Tariq Azeem Khan, a former senator and spokesman for the Pakistan Muslim
League-Q party, said Imran Khan's comments showed his "political naivete."

"Because police come under the local provincial administration, they might try
to block them, but without the consensus of the central government, they will
not succeed," he said.

Imran Khan, a former international cricket star, mounted a vigorous campaign in
Pakistani parliamentary elections this year by stressing his opposition to the
drone strikes and calling for a tougher stance against U.S. policy in the
region. His party finished third in the national election but won enough seats
in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa to form a coalition government there.

From that perch, Khan has maintained his profile as a leading champion of peace
talks and an end to the U.S. drone strikes. Under pressure from Khan and others
domestically, Sharif has also publicly stressed his opposition to the strikes,
even though a recent Washington Post report noted that past Pakistani leaders
were frequently briefed on the progress of the U.S. drone campaign.

On Thursday, Sharif's government condemned a suspected U.S. drone strike the
night before targeting suspected militants in North Waziristan. No one was
killed in the strike, local officials said.

"There is an across-the-board consensus [in Pakistan] that these drone strikes
must end," the Foreign Ministry said in a statement.

After a meeting at the White House last week, Sharif and President Obama issued
a joint statement pledging "robust bilateral defense cooperation" in a number of
areas, including the movement of NATO cargo through Pakistan.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Shaiq Hussain in Islamabad and Ernesto Londo√±o in Washington contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


