                             1991 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                            November 5, 2013 Tuesday

Rand Paul's Plagiarism

BYLINE: JULIET LAPIDOS

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 466 words



HIGHLIGHT: The story so far, told (almost) entirely in other people&#8217;s
words.


The story so far, told (almost) entirely in other people's words. Brackets
indicate original thinking. Click the links for attribution.

Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) has been accused of multiple counts of plagiarism - both
in speeches he gave and in a book he wrote.

It all began last week when MSNBC host Rachel Maddow accused the senator of
lifting passages about the 1997 science fiction film "Gattaca" from the movie's
Wikipedia entry when he made a speech on Oct. 28 supporting Virginia
gubernatorial candidate Ken Cuccinelli. The passages [were] similar, with only a
few words changed here and there.

[Then] BuzzFeed decided to look into if Rand Paul had copied from Wikipedia
before. BuzzFeed claimed that a Paul speech in June describing the movie "Stand
and Deliver" also included substantial similarities to its Wikipedia entry.

[Next,] Politico's Alexander Burns said that [Mr.] Paul, in a 2013 response to
President Obama's State of the Union address, used language that was exactly the
same as a 2011 Associated Press report.

[Still on the case, BuzzFeed said that] an entire section of [Mr.] Paul's 2013
book "Government Bullies" was copied wholesale from a 2003 case study by the
Heritage Foundation.

Ok Rand Paul this is getting out of hand.

[But] Paul's team strenuously contested any suggestion that he was deliberately
plagiarizing in his remarks.

"I think I'm being unfairly targeted by a bunch of hacks and haters, and I'm
just not going to put up with people casting aspersions on my character," he
fumed on ABC's "This Week" Sunday.

"I take it as an insult," [Mr.] Paul continued. "And I will not lie down and say
people can call me dishonest, misleading or misrepresenting, and if dueling were
legal in Kentucky, if they keep it up, you know it'd be a duel challenge."

[Undaunted, BuzzFeed reported that] sections of an op-ed [Mr.] Paul wrote on
mandatory minimums in The Washington Times in September appear[ed] nearly
identical to an article by Dan Stewart of The Week.

[In The Washington Times op-ed] Mr. Paul wrote this: "America now jails a higher
percentage of its citizens than any other country, including China and Iran, at
the staggering cost of $80 billion a year."

[Mr. Stewart's earlier article] included this sentence: "America now jails a
higher percentage of its citizens than any other country, including China and
Iran, at the staggering cost of $80 billion a year."

In an interview on Tuesday, [Mr. Paul said] he was not certain whether [the
plagiarism scandal] would affect his prospects should he decide to run for
president in 2016 [and that] he would happily return to his Kentucky doctor's
practice.

H/t David Shields


     ·    Rand Paul, a Prisoner's Best Friend?
     ·    McConnell's Campaign Manager 'Holding His Nose'
     ·    The Boston Bombing and Immigration
     ·    The Senator From Paranoia
     ·    Drone Disdain


LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


