                             2009 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                            December 2, 2013 Monday

Video of Police Brutality in Kiev Fuels Rage

BYLINE: ROBERT MACKEY

LENGTH: 1058 words



HIGHLIGHT: Protesters and local journalists in Kiev documented a tumultuous
weekend in the Ukrainian capital in online video.


As my colleague David Herszenhorn reports from Kiev, thousands of opposition
protesters demanding the resignation of the government continued to occupy
Independence Square in the Ukrainian capital on Monday, two days after images of
the police battering demonstrators there backfired on the authorities, swelling
the street protests.

One video clip of riot police officers attacking protesters before dawn on
Saturday, posted on YouTube by the Afghan-Ukrainian journalist Mustafa Nayyem,
was viewed more than 780,000 times within 48 hours. Similar footage broadcast by
Ukraine's Channel 5 and shared widely on social networks showed images of
bloodied protesters.

Perhaps aware of its online audience, the channel later posted an extended remix
of its video of protesters being battered by the police on YouTube, set to a
driving beat from the Ukrainian band Tartak.

Hromdaske.tv, a new Ukrainian Internet television channel that is providing
live-stream coverage of the protests, also added music to one video report on
the attempt to clear the square Saturday, along with subtitled video of a police
spokeswoman attempting to explain the action.

The violence intensified on Sunday, after protesters denounced as "provocateurs"
by opposition leaders commandeered a tractor and attempted to break through
police lines around the president's office on Bankova Street.

Revolutionary tractor moving closer to police barricade near presidential
compound. http://t.co/wFEu2Z5nFS

- Leonid Ragozin (@leonidragozin)1 Dec 13

One of provocateurs on Bankova Street outside presidential admin today. They
came prepared for battle. #Kyiv #Ukraine http://t.co/7lYqW2mlXS

- Christopher Miller (@ChristopherJM)1 Dec 13

As Ilya Mouzykantskii, a former intern at the Moscow bureau of The New York
Times, explained, the mayhem around the president's office led to jokes online
that compared the streets of Kiev to those of Gotham, the fictional city
patrolled by Batman.

Video of the ensuing clashes near the presidential compound Sunday evening
posted on YouTube and the Russian social network VK by Vasia Nikolayenko, a
20-year-old filmmaker in Kiev, showed officers charging into the crowd, clubbing
demonstrators and breaking their phones, but also coming under attack
themselves.

Perhaps aware that violence against the police risked tarnishing the reputation
of the protests, and could give President Viktor Yanukovich a reason to declare
emergency rule, opposition leaders had tried to defuse the tension outside the
presidential compound before it boiled over.  Video posted on YouTube by Uliana
Kovalchuk appeared to have been recorded on Sunday evening from above Bankova
Street as political leaders tried to talk protesters down using megaphones.

Glenn Kates, who is live-blogging the protests for Radio Free Europe/Radio
Liberty, points out that one opposition leader, the boxer-turned-politician
Vitali Klitschko, even made a personal effort to intimidate one man identified
as a provocateur, in a scene captured on video.

According to Thomas Grove, a Reuters correspondent, Mr. Klitschko eventually
succeeded in convincing a few thousand protesters to leave the area.

Klitschko calling people away from presidential administration, 2-3,000 followed
him down to main square #Ukraine #euromaidan

- Thomas Grove (@tggrove)1 Dec 13

Video shot by Christopher Miller, an American editor for the Kyiv Post, showed
riot police officers coming under attack from protesters in another part of the
city on Sunday night, as they attempted to defend a statue of Lenin from assault
by the demonstrators.

As The Moscow News explained, "That Lenin statue in downtown Kiev has been point
of contention for years. Attacked before, to communists' outrage.

Mr. Miller reported on Twitter that Lenin's defenders were members of the
Ukrainian interior ministry's special forces, known as the Berkut.

SPECIAL FORCES MOVED IN TO PREVENT MOB FROM TOPPLING LENIN STAUTE. MOB COUNTERED
USING STONES, LADDERS, WOOD, FIRECRACKERS, TEAR GAS, ETC..

- Christopher Miller (@ChristopherJM)1 Dec 13

Although a rumor swept social networks at one stage that Lenin had been
decapitated in the fighting, video posted online by the American-financed Radio
Free Europe/Radio Liberty showed that the Soviet icon remained standing and
intact.

Following that mayhem, Hromdaske.tv posted video online Tuesday of a group of
female protesters, chanting "Peaceful!" and marching up to a line of riot police
officers. The women then decorated the officer's shields with ribbons and
painted hearts in blue and gold, the colors of Ukraine, and the European Union.

Among the casualties of the weekend's violence, were dozens of journalists,
including a photographer for The New York Times, Joseph Sywenkyj, who was
wounded by shrapnel from a stun grenade or gas canister, and Roman Kupriyanov, a
cameraman for Euronews who suffered a concussion after being clubbed in the head
by a police officer while filming the clashes near the presidential compound.

Journalist injured by stun grenade #euromaidan RT @varlamov [#x423]
[#x436][#x443][#x440]\xD0[#x430][#x43b][#x438][#x441][#x442]a
[#x440][#x430][#x437]o[#x440][#x432][#x430][#x43b][#x430][#x441][#x44c] [#x432]
\xD0o[#x433][#x430][#x445] [#x433][#x440][#x430]\xD0[#x430][#x442][#x430]
[#x441] [#x433][#x430][#x437]o[#x43c] http://t.co/cKwP1YZmzz

- The Moscow News (@themoscownews)1 Dec 13

In addition to occupying Independence Square, protesters also retained control
of the Kiev city council building on Monday, where they painted the words
"Revolution Headquarters," in black paint, defaced images of the president and
jeered when a supporter of the government appeared to speak with them.

[#x428][#x442][#x430][#x431] [#x440][#x435][#x432]o[#x43b][#x446][#x438][#x438]
http://t.co/143ivxQT9d

- Ilya Varlamov (@varlamov)1 Dec 13

City Hall RT @MaryanaDrach1: K[#x438][#x44f]\xD0[#x438] [#x456]
[#x433]o[#x441][#x442][#x456] [#x434][#x430][#x43b][#x456]
[#x430][#x43a][#x442][#x438][#x432]\xD0o
[#x444]o[#x442]o[#x433][#x440][#x430][#x444][#x443][#x442][#x44c][#x441][#x44f].
[#x423] [#x43c][#x456][#x43a][#x440]o[#x444]o\xD0
[#x433]o[#x432]o[#x440][#x44f][#x442][#x44c] \xD0[#x440]o
\xD0[#x430][#x446][#x456]o\xD0[#x430][#x43b][#x44c]\xD0[#x443]
[#x440][#x435][#x432]o[#x43b][#x446][#x456] http://t.co/FFA5WW2f6a

- Glenn Kates (@gkates)1 Dec 13

As Glenn Kates reported on Monday: "Vadim Kolesnichenko, a Party of Regions
deputy, known for his efforts to make Russian an official language, along with
Ukrainian, came to the city administration building today - apparently in an
attempt to speak with protesters. It did not go over well. Protesters shout
'ganba' - shame."


     ·    Police Officer in Brazil Jokes on Facebook About Breaking Truncheon
          Over Protester
     ·    Protests Expand in Brazil, Fueled by Video of Police Brutality
     ·    Ukraine's President Accused of Plagiarism
     ·    A Lot of Music, and a Little Protest, as Hasidic Jews Come to
          Ukrainian Town
     ·    In Thailand, a Drone's Eye View of Protests


LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


