                             2091 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (After Deadline)

                              May 27, 2014 Tuesday

Bright Passages

BYLINE: PHILIP B. CORBETT

SECTION: TIMESTOPICS

LENGTH: 1586 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Here&#8217;s another small sampling of sparkling prose from recent
editions.


Here's another small sampling of sparkling prose from recent editions.

International, 5/7:

Russia Quietly Tightens Reins on Web With 'Bloggers Law'

The idea that the Internet was at best controlled anarchy and beyond any one
nation's control is fading globally amid determined attempts by more and more
governments to tame the web. If innovations like Twitter were hailed as recently
as the Arab uprisings as the new public square, governments like those in China,
Pakistan, Turkey, Iran and now Russia are making it clear that they can deploy
their tanks on virtual squares, too.

An inventive image for Neil MacFarquhar's story about moves in Russia and
elsewhere to crackdown on the Internet.

Business Day, 4/17:

Earnings and Sales From Google Disappoint

SAN FRANCISCO - Alexander the Great is said to have wept because he ran out of
kingdoms to conquer. Google is eager to avoid such a miserable fate.

Its core digital advertising business is so dominant that analysts are
questioning just how much it can continue to grow. So Google is unleashing its
vast cash hoard on robotics, artificial intelligence, smart thermostats and,
just this week, high-altitude drone satellites.

The only thing all these acquisitions have in common is a focus on the future -
often, the distant future.

The risk in thinking about what will be big in 2050, however, is that you can
lose sight of 2014.

Once again David Streitfeld finds a larger theme, and a memorable lead, to
enliven an earnings story.

National, 4/11:

Obama Salutes Rights Act, Turning 50

AUSTIN, Tex. - For three days, the veterans of a long-ago movement reunited and
drew together their spiritual heirs to explore the legacy of the Civil Rights
Act a half-century after it transformed America. And then the legacy walked
onstage.

President Obama presented himself on Thursday as the living, walking, talking
and governing embodiment of the landmark 1964 law that banned discrimination on
the basis of race, color, religion or national origin.

A sharp, arresting image by Peter Baker encapsulated the news and the history.

Dining, 3/26:

A Real Treat or Half-Baked?

Smart bakers are abandoning the croissant-doughnut formula and examining their
own pastry cases with a speculative eye. The race to invent the next big thing
in hybrid desserts is on, and it is fierce.

"It's like the quest to create a new smartphone, but in food," said Mr. Ansel,
who stands in for Steve Jobs in this simile. And the dozens of bakers who are
busy inventing doissants, mallomacs, crookies and the like are app developers,
locked in a fight to create the best new product for the platform.

Witty touches by Julia Moskin about cutting-edge innovation in the pastry world.

Metro, 5/10:

Last Stop, Last Drop: Bar Cars Chug Into Commuter History

There are those who sip discreetly on subway trains, reaching for the paper bags
in their coat pockets, or pull flasks from their knapsacks in the darkened back
corners of a city bus.

Such is the stigma of drinking in transit, where the sloshed are supposed to
have boarded that way.

But for decades, passengers on the Metro-North Railroad have found a workaround
amid the fake wood panels and lounge-style seating of the bar car - the space
where everybody may or may not know your name, but none would dare cast a
judgmental glare about that fourth beer before the Stamford station.

With a series of amusing touches, Matt Flegenheimer brought readers along for a
last ride on the bar car.

Metro, 5/1:

The 21st Century Is Calling, With Wi-Fi Hot Spots

In the era of smartphones, pay phones look increasingly dumb.

Dumb, that is, to everyone but advertisers and pay phone operators, who are
happy to place thousands of small billboards at consumer eye level.

A survey conducted Monday along an unscientifically selected route (my 21-block
walk home from the office, largely along Eighth Avenue) found 22 curbside public
phones in 17 enclosures, with a total of 48 advertising panels.

Advertising panels in use: 48, or 100 percent.

Working telephones: 13, or 59 percent.

Public phones in use by the public: 0, or 0 percent.

...

Perhaps the most important design feature that may change is all of one inch
high. Coin slots may disappear. ...

Snitches of the 21st century will just have to drop a prepaid card.

A reader wrote to praise David Dunlap's column about the proposed transformation
of city pay phones, which was delightful from start to kicker.

Obituaries, 4/8:

Mickey Rooney, a Master of Putting On a Show, Is Dead at 93

Suits for alimony, child support and back taxes pursued him like tin cans tied
to the bumper of the car he was driving to his next wedding.

A memorable image in the lively Mickey Rooney obit by Aljean Harmetz.

Automobiles, 4/6:

Stripper With a Heart of Gold

When the Volkswagen Jetta was redesigned for the 2011 model year, it took a big
step back from the carefully honed upscale aspirations of its predecessors.

The philosophical departure wasn't so much the difference between Target and
Walmart as the difference between Target and your crazy neighbor's weekly lawn
sale. ...

Please note that the bargain-basement S model is still powered by an 8-valve
4-cylinder that's so old its blueprints were drawn on the wall of a cave.

A reader singled out these choice one-liners from Ezra Dyer's skeptical review
of the new Volkswagen Jetta SE.


 In a Word

This week's grab bag of grammar, style and other missteps, compiled with help
from colleagues and readers.

PARIS - An international tribunal that has spent five years and more than $325
million investigating a political assassination in Lebanon without making a
single arrest finally got on Tuesday its first look at an accused in the dock.

Avoid putting the time element between the verb and its direct object. Also, the
long subordinate clause and lack of punctuation make this hard to read. Perhaps
something like: "An international tribunal, which has spent ... single arrest,
on Tuesday finally got its first look ..."

One would enforce a humanitarian aid resolution that the Council has already
passed and that the warring parties, particularly the government, has repeatedly
flouted.

Make it "the warring parties ... have repeatedly flouted."

Incomes in this country have fared worse over the last few years than in much of
Europe.

Not parallel. Make it, "Incomes have fared worse in this country over the last
few years than in ..."

Instead of going for a wide receiver with only traditional skills, Beckham will
most likely be a presence meant to keep opposing defenses guessing.

Dangler. It's the Giants, not Beckham, who chose not to go for a wide receiver
with only traditional skills.

Mourners wanted answers when the prime minister visited. Instead, some said,
they got defiance.

As a colleague points out, "defiance" most often describes bold resistance to
authority. So it seems odd, in this story about the Turkish mine disaster, to
describe the prime minister's attitude toward the families that way.

[Photo caption] A view of Nuevo Laredo from across the Rio Grande River in
Laredo.

Rio means river; as The Times's stylebook says, use Rio Grande, not Rio Grande
River.

But a review of internal documents, emails and interviews paint a different
picture, showing that high-ranking officials, particularly in G.M.'s legal
department, led by the general counsel Michael P. Millikin, acted with
increasing urgency in the last 12 months to grapple with the spreading impact of
the ignition problem.

Another agreement problem; once again we were led astray by the intervening
words. Make it "a review ... paints." (The sentence is also overstuffed and
could use some paring.)

Here at a west Philadelphia Democratic ward meeting, a crowd that had gathered
Thursday to hear one of the women running for governor, Congresswoman Allyson Y.
Schwartz, concentrated more on eating their fried chicken than on listening to
her speech, at least until Ms. Schwartz concluded her remarks with a reminder
about the stakes in Tuesday's primary.

Our style is "Representative," not "Congressman" or "Congresswoman."

In an era of what many perceive as outsize executive compensation, it's not
unusual for a successful public company to lavish its chief executive with a
multimillion-dollar pay package.

In traditional usage, the direct object of "lavish" is the thing bestowed, not
the receiver. Make it "lavish a multimillion-dollar pay package on its chief
executive," or choose a different verb.

She has compiled a moderate record, although her votes have become increasingly
more conservative since President Obama took office in 2009.

Redundant (later fixed).

Having shined in his 14-year career with the Green Bay Packers, the Minnesota
Vikings and the Saints, he will have an orange jumpsuit and handcuffs as his
uniform Friday.

Here's what the stylebook says:

shine, shined, shone. When shine has an object, the past tense is shined: He
shined the light at the boat. But when it has no object, the past tense is
shone: The sun shone all weekend.

Mr. Baldwin's arrest came amid a citywide effort on Tuesday, with another push
planned on Friday, by the Police Department to crack down on traffic
infractions, especially cellphone usage by drivers and failure to yield to
pedestrians.

And here's what the stylebook says about "usage":

usage, use. Usage refers to habitual or preferred practice in fields like
grammar, law, etiquette and diplomacy. Use is the less stilted term for
employment or consumption: the use of energy; gasoline use; automobile use; drug
use.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


