                             2078 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday

Ackman and Valeant Drum Up Stealth Activism

BYLINE: ROBERT CYRAN and RICHARD BEALES

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 434 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Pershing Square Capital Management and Valeant Pharmaceuticals
quietly set up to go hostile for Allergan if necessary, Robert Cyran and Richard
Beales write for Reuters Breakingviews.


Remember the dawn raid, when a would-be acquirer built up a stake before the
target realized it was under attack? The activist investor William A.  Ackman
has come up with a kind of drone strike version. His Pershing Square Capital
Management hedge fund and Valeant Pharmaceuticals have teamed up to grab a
potential 9.7 percent stake in Allergan, with a hostile takeover by Valeant
ready for deployment.

The acquisitive Valeant has reasons to be receptive to such an arrangement. For
one thing, it's essentially the creation of an activist hedge fund, ValueAct
Capital, which set it on the path of serial deal-making. Cutting research and
development costs and applying its low tax rate to acquired businesses has
served investors well. Its stock is up more than tenfold since it started buying
rivals in 2008. The prospect of another deal kicked its shares 10 percent higher
after regular market hours on Monday, taking its market capitalization up to $46
billion.

Moreover, Valeant, which contributed $76 million to Pershing Square's Allergan
war chest, knew that nearly 10 percent of shareholder votes were in
deal-friendly hands before it had to announce its intentions. Mr. Ackman has
also committed to buy $400 million of Valeant stock at a discount and to hold
considerably more for at least a year if the company does manage to buy
Allergan.

For his part, Mr. Ackman gets to skip the step in which, after buying a stake in
a company he thinks is ripe for a shake-up, he then tries to make something
happen. Instead, he has a ready-made buyer. The result so far is a gain of at
least $1 billion on paper - and he hasn't even yet had to turn cost-effective
call options, through which Pershing Square has acquired the bulk of its
economic interest, into shares.

A successful outcome isn't assured for a hostile Valeant offer for Allergan. The
two companies compete in the plastic surgery area, so antitrust regulators may
ask questions. And after Allergan's shares popped 20 percent on Monday, it's now
larger than its suitor with a market value of more than $50 billion.

There are rules that would have forced a Valeant disclosure much sooner had it
started accumulating stock in Allergan for itself. Of course, Mr. Ackman is
putting up most of the capital, and there's no suggestion anything should have
been revealed sooner. Even so, another set of watchdogs may wonder whether this
novel battlefield tactic is too stealthy for comfort.

Robert Cyran is a columnist and Richard Beales an assistant editor for Reuters
Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit
breakingviews.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


