                             2031 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                            January 21, 2014 Tuesday

As Images of Attacker are Shared, Thai Government Issues Emergency Rule

LENGTH: 454 words



HIGHLIGHT: The government in Thailand imposed emergency rule over protests, and
law enforcement authorities circulated images of a man alleged to be behind a
recent grenade attack.


[#xe0a][#xe48][#xe27][#xe22][#xe01][#xe31][#xe19][#xe41][#xe08][#xe49][#xe07][#x
e40][#xe1a][#xe32][#xe30][#xe41][#xe2a]...[#xe15][#xe32][#xe21][#xe08][#xe31][#x
e1a][#xe04][#xe19][#xe23][#xe49][#xe32][#xe22][#xe15][#xe32][#xe21][#xe20][#xe32
][#xe1e][#xe19][#xe30][#xe04][#xe23][#xe31][#xe1a] http://t.co/XFSiRE7SsG

- [#xe17][#xe35][#xe21][#xe42][#xe06][#xe29][#xe01] [#xe15][#xe23].
(@PoliceSpokesmen)20 Jan 14

As my colleague Thomas Fuller reported from Bangkok on Tuesday, the government
in Thailand has declared the imposition of emergency rule to start on Wednesday.

The decree comes after protesters were attacked by unknown assailants in recent
days; three grenade attacks left one person dead and dozens injured. The
government and the protesters have blamed each other for those assaults.

This week, the law enforcement authorities in Thailand have released images of
the man suspected of being behind one of those attacks.

They posted video of the suspect loitering in an alley near a convenience store
and then extracting an object and hurling it, causing an explosion, before
running off in the opposite direction.
[Video: Footage released on Jan. 19 by the Thai police of one of the attacks on
protestors in Bangkok. Watch on YouTube.]
[Video: Thai police release footage on Jan. 18 of the suspected attacker
throwing the grenade. Watch on YouTube.]

In its report on the violence on Friday at Banthat Thong road and on Sunday at
the capital's Victory Monument, The Bangkok Post quoted the deputy chief of the
Metropolitan Police, Col. Adul Narongsak, as saying the two attacks were
believed to have been carried out by one group based on debris and pins found at
the scene that identified similar high-explosive fragmentation devices were used
in each.

As Mr. Fuller reported, the foreign minister, Surapong Tovichakchaikul, said the
emergency rule move was necessary because protesters had broken the law by
blocking government offices and banks in recent days and threatening and
harassing government officials.

He said in his reporting over the weekend that the attack last Friday took place
as a "dwindling but dedicated core of protesters" continued to block access to a
number of government buildings and major intersections.

Humphrey Cheung, a freelance cameraman, posted footage from a remote controlled
camera of protests on Monday at a bank and late on Tuesday at an intersection in
the capital, where protestors have focused a campaign they call "Bangkok
Shutdown."

[Video: Journalist Humphrey Cheung posted this remote controlled footage taken
Jan. 20 of protestors surrounding Government Savings Bank.  Watch on YouTube.]

[Video: Freelance video journalist Humphrey Cheung posted video of Jan 21
protest at Asoke intersection in Bangkok Watch on YouTube.]


     ·    Thailand Protests Are Captured in Social Media and Onstage
     ·    In Thailand, a Drone's Eye View of Protests
     ·    Flood Waters Free Crocodiles in Thailand
     ·    Anger in London, as Killing of Unarmed Man That Sparked Riots Is
          Called Lawful
     ·    Last Words From a Beirut Bombing Victim


LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


