                             2066 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (City Room)

                              April 4, 2014 Friday

New York Today: Floating Your Boat

SECTION: NYREGION

LENGTH: 747 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â What you need to know for Friday: the city&#8217;s boat launches
open, dismal weather turning nice for the weekend, and a late-night farewell.


 Good morning on this drizzly Friday.

The weather will be pretty nasty all day, but it's supposed to clear up
tomorrow.

Just in time to climb into a boat and hit the water.

It's opening weekend at the city's canoe and kayak launches.

From sheltered bays to marshlands lined with tall grass, flowing rivers to open
ocean, the city has more than 40 places to float a boat. That's double the
number from a few years ago.

Each offers immediate escape: gentle rocking and the sound of lapping water make
the concrete city suddenly recede.

Parks officials are excited about a new park at the northern tip of Manhattan,
Muscota Marsh.

"The view of the rocks across the way in Riverdale is lovely," said Nate Grove,
the marina manager for the city park system.

To use the launches, you need a $15 permit, and, for now, it's pretty much
B.Y.O.B. - bring your own boat.

The sole exception this time of year is at Brooklyn's Marine Park.

There, a vendor called Wheel Fun offers kayaks and stand-up paddleboards you can
take around a sandy island in Jamaica Bay.

Wheel Fun will open its season only if it's sunny and the temperature is at
least 55 degrees.

But both days this weekend should satisfy those requirements.

Here's what else you need to know.

WEATHER

Unrelenting grayness, rain for much of the day, temperatures flat-lining in the
mid-40s.

The sequel is a lot better, as noted above: 60 on Saturday, 58 on Sunday, clear
skies.

COMMUTE

Subways: No delays.  Check latest status.

Rails:  O.K. Check L.I.R.R., Metro-North or N.J. Transit status.

Roads:  No major delays. Check traffic map or radio report on the 1s or the 8s.

Alternate-side parking is  in effect .

Weekend Travel Hassles: Check subway disruptions or list of street closings.

COMING UP TODAY

The state comptroller, Thomas DiNapoli, releases a report on the fiscal impact
of asthma in New York.

Mayor de Blasio meets with Israel's foreign affairs minister, Avigdor Lieberman.

Politicians, labor leaders and others go on a 10-mile civil rights march on the
46th anniversary of Martin Luther King's assassination, from Kennedy to La
Guardia Airport, starting at 10 a.m.

The Affordable Art Fair - offering contemporary art priced mostly under $5,000 -
continues through Sunday at the Metropolitan Pavilion on West 18th Street.

Religious leaders protest outside City Hall against Thursday's federal ruling
upholding the city's right to ban churches from holding services in public
schools. The mayor has said he believes churches should have access to schools.

Fifty-cent subs at Blimpie, for the first 200 customers at participating
locations, in honor of the sandwich chain's 50th anniversary.

What does the world really think of Barack Obama? Scholars and writers answer
the question in a forum at St. Francis College in Brooklyn. 2 p.m. [Free]

The photographer Tomas Van Houtryve, who attached a camera to a small drone and
took it around the country,  speaks at Made in New York Media Center in Dumbo,
which has a new exhibition about surveillance. 7 p.m. [$15]

The novelist Tao Lin reads at N.Y.U. 7 p.m. [Free]

For more events, see The New York Times Arts & Entertainment guide.

And if you're looking for fun stuff to do outside New York City, The Times's
Metropolitan section has suggestions for Westchester, Long Island, New Jersey
and Connecticut.

IN THE NEWS

David Letterman is retiring next year. [New York Times]

A warden at Rikers Island was demoted after an inmate died in an overheated
cell. [New York Times]

Brooklyn's Housing Court finds itself homeless. [New York Times]

James Franco is in hot water over his Instagram exchange with a 17-year-old girl
who photographed him after a Broadway performance of "Of Mice or Men."
[Gothamist]

A man was fatally injured trying to subway-surf atop a 6 train in the Bronx.
[New York Post]

What happens when courts rely on stenographers to create trial records and one
has a drinking problem? Nothing good. [New York Times]

Scoreboard: Yankees beat Astros, 4-2. Nationals whip Mets, 8-2. Avalanche
outlast Rangers, 3-2 in shootout.

Sandra E. Garcia contributed reporting.

New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late
morning.  You can receive it via email.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at
nytoday@nytimes.com or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Follow the New York Today columnists, Annie Correal and Andy Newman, on Twitter.

You can always find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


