                             2079 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                         (The Public Editor's Journal)

                            April 23, 2014 Wednesday

On Combating Government Secrecy: One Step Forward, One Leap Back

BYLINE: MARGARET SULLIVAN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 662 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â A court ruling provides a press-rights victory; a new government
directive chokes off information; and James Risen waits.


 To put it mildly, President Obama's early promises of transparency in
government haven't exactly turned out that way.

In fact, lots of people who should know call his administration the most
secretive ever. It has also been one of the worst for press freedom. James
Goodale, the former Times lawyer, has labeled Mr. Obama worse than Richard Nixon
on that score.

For those who care about such things - as I know many Times readers do - this
week has been eventful, with some good news and some bad in the mix. To wit:

[#x25aa] A federal appeals panel has ruled that classified information about the
targeted killing of an American citizen, Anwar al-Awlaki, in Yemen should be
made public.

The Times - along with the reporters Scott Shane and Charlie Savage - sued under
the Freedom of Information Act to get the legal justification for the drone
attack in 2011, as did the American Civil Liberties Union.

The Times's newsroom lawyer, David McCraw, praised the decision, saying that the
court had "reaffirmed a bedrock principle of democracy: The people do not have
to accept blindly the government's assurances that it is operating within the
bounds of the law; they get to see for themselves the legal justification that
the government is working from." The ruling is a blow to what a Times editorial
called the administration's "self-serving and duplicitous game over its power to
kill people away from any battlefield and without judicial oversight or
accountability." And it is likely to be appealed.

[#x25aa] In a directive from James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national
intelligence, the Obama administration toldofficials at 17 agencies to stop
talking to reporters about intelligence-related matters.

The Times reported that the new rules required agency employees "to report any
unplanned contact with journalists. Officials who violate the directive may be
disciplined or fired, the directive says."

The Reuters columnist Jack Shafersmacked it around in a column: "Directive 119
might make sense if the administration could point to a pattern of unauthorized
discussions that has done lasting damage to national security. But that it does
not do. Instead, it tightens the circle. And it feeds us all another helping of
dung."

[#x25aa] Meanwhile, here is the latest on the Times national security reporter's
Jim Risen's efforts to both protect his confidential source and stay out of
jail. Answering my request for a status report, he told me in an email Tuesday:
"The Supreme Court has not yet decided whether to take the case. The Justice
Department has until this Friday to respond to our request that the court hear
our case. They are expected to file a brief Friday opposing our request. My
lawyer will then have a few days to file a reply brief, probably in early May.
And then the court will decide, at one of its conferences, probably in May or
June, whether to take the case."

[#x25aa] And finally, a new film by James Spione, "Silenced," depicts the high
price paid by former government employees who have become whistle-blowers. It
has one more showing at the Tribeca Film Festival on Thursday before moving to
Toronto; it will be in wider release later.

Mr. Spione had open access to a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst, John
Kiriakou, whom Scott Shane wrote about last year in a front-page article. The
activist and lawyer Jesselyn Radack, a whistle-blower herself, has a key role,
and the former National Security Agency executive and whistle-blower Thomas
Drake steals the show with his intelligence and dignity.

As for the film's depiction of the press, there is a heroine and a goat. The New
Yorker's Jane Mayer gets props for an early and influential profile of Mr. Drake
that may have helped get the charges against him dropped; the counterbalance is
NBC's Savannah Guthrie - who, on camera, grills the pitiable and jail-bound Mr.
Kiriakou as if she were on Eric Holder's payroll. Seconds later, off camera, she
smiles sweetly and whispers to him, "Take care."

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


