                             2155 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (ArtsBeat)

                            October 26, 2014 Sunday

'Homeland' Recap: Are You Finding Carrie a Little Creepy?

BYLINE: JUDITH WARNER

SECTION: ARTS

LENGTH: 1049 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â But there is an upside to Carrie&#8217;s outrageous behavior: Quinn
is talking back.


 Season 4, Episode 5, "About a Boy"

A number of viewers complained a few weeks ago that the baby-in-the-bathtub
scene was enough to make them switch off "Homeland" for good, complaints that
resurfaced last week in response to Carrie's pending seduction of the (former)
medical student Aayan Ibrahim (Suraj Sharma).

If those episodes did indeed bring some defections, I fear that tonight's may
lead to a stampede.

It's a good thing that Aayan, nephew of the wanted terrorist Haissam Haqqani has
a full chest of hair. It provided at least some visual reassurance that Carrie
was not, all behavioral evidence to the contrary, seducing a minor, and that we
viewers were not, by extension, complicit in a sex crime. The show's creators
are clearly pulling out all the stops to make us uncomfortable, even having us
sneak up, Peeping Tom-like, on Carrie and Aayan through the narrow slit of the
bedroom shutters.

For peace of mind, I found myself pausing the episode to look up the actor Suraj
Sharma's age. He is 21. But that little reality check didn't make Claire Danes'
all-too-pervy ministrations ("You like pastries, coffee?" early in the episode)
any less stomach-turning.

"It's a bit overwhelming," she reassured the former virgin.

Merely typing the words gives me the creeps.

And, of course, Sharma did his part as well.

Aayan's ingratiating worry that he "took" but "didn't give" during sex? T.M.I.

His surreptitious glimpse at Carrie's Caesarean scar? Just too much.

Now that Carrie has blown through enough boundaries to draw "the boy" - as Saul
calls him - into her circle of trust and has managed to elicit from him the
admission that his uncle is, indeed, alive (and sick) let's hope that this nasty
narrative interlude can quickly come to an end.  Carrie appears to be losing
heart: the tears during sex, the glimpses of hesitation playing out on her face
during the call to prayer.

Quinn has clearly had it - badmouthing Carrie to Fara, stalking off after Carrie
refuses to admit that her enhanced interrogation techniques are a bit ...
unseemly, with a single, shame-inducing word of condemnation: "Enjoy."

For viewers, there is an upside to Carrie's outrageous behavior: the sheer force
of righteous rage, helped along by the realization of the Inter-Services
Intelligence agency's role in Sandy Bachman's death, appears to have shocked
Quinn back to life again. He's showing a wider range of emotion, and with it -
what a relief! - the ability, once again, to make full use of his facial muscles
while speaking.

More happy thoughts on verbal delivery: The one moment of grace in this
otherwise dreary and, ultimately, forgettable episode, comes when the two most
intriguing characters of Season 5, Pakistani intelligence officers Tasneen
Kureshi (Nimrat Kaur) and Aasar Khan (Raza Jaffrey) team up at I.S.I.
headquarters to puzzle over the "strange game" the Americans in Islamabad appear
to be up to.

They're tracking Carrie's movements. They know that Saul, who was first supposed
to head home to Mira, but was instead entrusted with taking the news of
Haqqani's escape from death back to the C.I.A. chief Lockhart, has changed his
flight plans.

"Where is he now?" Tasneen asks Aasar.

"In the hotel gardens," he smiles derisively. "Working on his Finnish, best I
can tell."

"Finnish?"

"Rosetta Stone tapes."

"He can take his self-improvement back to America as far as I'm concerned. Good
riddance," she says.

If only Tasneen had been true to her word! Instead of enjoying an in-flight
movie, Saul is now held captive in a car trunk, on his way into the no-go zone
of the Taliban-controlled mountain region. I'm  starting to worry, frankly, that
the whole point of Saul's otherwise not terribly plot-advancing conversation
with General Bunny last week was to deliver a terribly foreshadowing of his
fate: At least the Soviets, Saul noted, "didn't saw our heads off on the
Internet."

You'll say no, such horrors couldn't possibly happen to Saul - but I don't know;
things are looking pretty bad on that road leading into the mountains, what with
Saul bound and gagged, soldiers looking the other way, Carrie absent without
leave with her boy toy, and no drone in the air to follow the bad guys before
they disappear. Chalk it up to abandonment issues from watching too much
"Downton Abbey"; once I get attached to a character, I've simply come to expect
the worst. That horrible, Klinghoffer-like image of Saul in a wheelchair didn't
help.

A couple of questions, before I leave you:

What's with Fara's new speaking style? Once upon a time, she was soft-spoken,
timid, and prone to tears. Now, presumably under Carrie's spell, she's brash and
brassy, spouting lines like "I'm trying to be ballsy here, but I'm not into
suicide." Granted, she appears to be somewhat ambivalent about her new super-spy
persona. But Quinn, like a one-man lean-in circle, keeps the encouragement
coming: "You went the extra mile," he tells her. And a bit later: "And guess
what? You're good at it."

I'll say this up front: I feel guilty about harboring suspicions about a
character once hassled for wearing a headscarf. And yet - I just feel like the
show keeps sending us red flags. There's the speed with which Fara spots the
cleric who facilitated the Aayan-Haissam meet-and-greet: "Good eyes!" exclaims
Quinn, either taking positive reinforcement to a new level of exuberance or
expressing a bit of surprise.

There's the fact that, in one scene, she giggles and stumbles as a colleague
struggles to teach her a few simple words of what I assume is Urdu, and then,
soon after, she is able to conduct a brief exchange (very brief, I'll grant you)
with the soldiers blocking the road containing Saul's car. And - this has
bothered me for weeks now - why did she race off, a few episodes back, just as
things were heating up, to say she had to take a call from her dad? Who takes
calls from their dad during an operation?

I may just be getting paranoid. After all, I re-watched the last episode of
Season 2 while exercising this week, and noticed that Saul was conveniently
called away from the C.I.A. building at the time of the car-bombing. And he
tried to take Carrie with him.

He couldn't have known about the bomb soon to explode just behind David Estes,
the man who very nearly ruined his career -  or could he?

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


