                             2184 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 12, 2014 Friday
                                 Every Edition

Relationships blur the lines

BYLINE: Stephanie Merry

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. T33

LENGTH: 694 words


Sometimes a great story is enough to overcome mediocre storytelling, and that's
the case with the documentary "The Green Prince." The b-roll is repetitive, the
interviewees leave holes in the narrative and the dramatizations can verge on
the cheesy. Oh, but what a tale.

Based on Mosab Hassan Yousef's memoir "Son of Hamas," the film recounts how
Yousef went from being the protege of his father, one of Hamas's founders, to a
spy for the Israeli intelligence organization Shin Bet. It all started when
Yousef, at age 17, decided to buy some guns. Having been brought up on the West
Bank and seeing his father arrested again and again, Yousef became angry at
Israel. "My father didn't tell me how to hate," he says in the film, but hate he
did, and violence seemed justified. But Israeli intelligence already had an eye
on Yousef, and he was arrested before he could plot an attack.

During a long interrogation, Yousef agreed to spy for Israel. He had no
intention of actually passing along information, but he saw it as a way out of
the torturous inquiry. But Yousef was sent to prison anyway, and it was there
that he became acquainted with another side to Hamas. As he tells it, the
organization ruled the prison, and members would routinely torture and kill
inmates suspected of spying. Many were innocent. Suddenly Yousef found himself
in a moral quandary, and he ultimately decided to work for Israel.

The only other interviewee in Israeli director Nadav Schirman's film is Yousef's
handler, Gonen Ben Yitzhak, who says that enlisting Yousef was "like recruiting
the son of the Israeli prime minister." Yitzhak also mentions at the beginning
of the film that the day he met Yousef - code name the Green Prince - was the
first day of the end of the Shin Bet agent's career. That phrase spikes one's
curiosity, along with other bits of foreshadowing that create suspense for those
unfamiliar with the source material.

In echoes of "The Wire," Yousef recalls how he had to figure out his own moral
code. When he found out that his father was the possible target of an Israeli
assassination, Yousef had him arrested instead. He may have been bringing shame
upon his family, but he also wanted to protect them.

The Green Prince has a knack for describing certain memories. He tells vivid
stories of his interrogation and the constant fear he experienced as a spy. But
sometimes the story feels incomplete, and it isn't entirely clear how Yousef got
from one point to another.

It would have been nice to hear from more than just two people, but given the
sensitive nature of the story, it's understandable that Schirman couldn't find
more sources to go on the record. There's also a limited cache of archival
footage, so we end up seeing the same video over and over, which appears to be
shot from a drone, of a man walking down a road in the desert. It's unclear
whether this is real footage of Yousef on his way to meet his handler or just
background video.

Regardless of the movie's shortcomings, however, the story feels stranger than
fiction. And although Yousef ended up working for Israel for a while (he now
lives in the United States), ultimately the film doesn't glorify that nation any
more than it sides with Hamas. Instead, "The Green Prince" is a timely look at
how one man broke the cycle of violence born of blind allegiance by seeking out
the facts and coming up with his own solutions.

stephanie.merry@washpost.com

Â½

PG-13. At Landmark's Bethesda Row Cinema. Contains thematic material and some
disturbing images. 95 minutes.

BioPage
http://www.washingtonpost.com/people/stephanie-merry
Description              "The Green Prince" is a timely look at how one man
broke the cycle of violence born of blind allegiance by seeking out the facts
and coming up with his own solutions.                                    Movie
Name              "The Green Prince"                                    Movie
Website
http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2304915/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1
Stars for this movie              2.5

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


