                             2151 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (ArtsBeat)

                            October 17, 2014 Friday

Popcast: The Myth of Scott Walker

BYLINE: BEN RATLIFF

SECTION: ARTS

LENGTH: 348 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Ben Ratliff and Jon Caramanica discuss Scott Walker and Sunn
O)))&#8217;s &#8220;Soused.&#8221;


The 71-year-old singer Scott Walker, collaborating with the drone-metal band
Sunn O))), has made a new record called "Soused," out next Tuesday from 4AD.
It's strong, strange and achieved, with Mr. Walker's baritone pushed high over
deep, loud, long-tones of electric guitar and bass. Other sounds - a bell, a
bullwhip, a half-valved trumpet moan - enter the music strategically, as
references to his lyrics of violence and discomfort, or as characters in a kind
of abstract audio play.

Mr. Walker came up as Scott Engel, a big-voiced California teenager in the
1950s, groomed toward Ricky Nelson's territory. He hit it big singing ebb-tide,
wall-of-sound ballads written by other people with the Walker Brothers in
England in the mid-60s; for a couple of years, according to the writer and
eyewitness Nik Cohn, they were "more hysterically screamed over than anyone
outside of the Stones." But then he started a kind of 50-year-long gritty-reboot
process. He loathed the machine, became the Star Who Wasn't Into It and indulged
his love of dark Europeanism (Brecht-Weill, Beckett, Camus, Pasolini). In the
late '60s he began to translate his feelings of alienation, frustration and
failure into solo records that seemed engineered to disturb anyone who had
previously understood him as a boy-band star. An early-70s backslide into
commercial soft-pop and country - some of which is probably better than he has
given it credit for - has only intensified the Myth of Scott.

On this week's Popcast, Jon Caramanica and I talk about "Soused," and whether it
has a different effect than the last four Scott Walker records, as well as Mr.
Walker's artistic narrative and his relationship to an audience. How important
is it that you know the Myth of Scott before you can properly hear his work? To
what extent is Scott Walker a fictional character, Scott Engel's staged drama?
What has that character done, and what does he still have to do?

Listen above, download the MP3 or subscribe in iTunes.

RELATED

Ben Ratliff on Scott Walker and Sunn O)))'s 'Soused.'

SPOTIFY PLAYLIST

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


