                             2108 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (City Room)

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday

New York Today: A Marijuana-Friendly Borough

BYLINE: ANDY NEWMAN and ANNIE CORREAL

SECTION: NYREGION

LENGTH: 773 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â What you need to know for Wednesday: A new policy on marijuana in
Brooklyn, another hot day, and a hip-hop festival.


 Good morning on this hazy Wednesday.

Marijuana is now effectively legal to possess in Brooklyn - at least for most
people.

The district attorney, Kenneth P. Thompson, announced Tuesday that his office
would not prosecute adults carrying up to two ounces of the drug unless there
were aggravating factors.

Among them: having a significant criminal record or smoking in some public
places or around children.

That is the will of the district attorney, over police objections. But what is
the will of the people?

We unscientifically surveyed a dozen passers-by in front of the D.A.'s office
and a police station.

A large majority backed the policy.

"I approve of it, as long as it's not paraded in the streets, because of the
little children," said Irvin Diggs, 63, a handyman walking by the 79th Precinct
station house in Bedford-Stuyvesant.

Sylvia Morse, 27, an urban planning graduate walking by the prosecutor's office
downtown, said that while the measure did not eliminate discriminatory police
enforcement, "it provides a check and balance."

(There will be a protest against arrest disparities outside City Hall today.)

Only two of the 12 people we talked to expressed reservations.

A 52-year-old named Ivette said the threshold was too lax. "Smaller quantities,
maybe," she said.

T. Salik, a former corrections officer, said, "You can't walk down the street
with an open container of alcohol. Why should you be able to smoke marijuana
openly?"

Here's what else you need to know.

WEATHER

Hot with a cloud here and there. And a high of 87.

A chance of thunderstorms after dark. Thursday looks similar.

COMING UP TODAY

Mayor de Blasio holds a public hearing on the bill to establish municipal
identification cards for city residents at the City Council Chambers. 3:30 p.m.

The astronaut Mae Jemison leads science experiments with children at an
exhibition in Grand Central. 10:15 a.m.

The League of United Latin American Citizens Convention continues in Midtown
with a citizenship ceremony for 75 new immigrants. 11 a.m.

A sculpture by seven female artists, "Tree of Life," is unveiled in Van
Cortlandt Park in the Bronx. 11 a.m.

A march from Israel's Mission to the U.N. to News Corp. headquarters to protest
the treatment of Palestinians. 5:30 p.m.

The Feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel in Williamsburg kicks off with Danny
Vecchiano and the Giglio Band. 6 p.m. [Free]

The Brooklyn Hip Hop Festival arrives in Williamsburg. Noon. [$5 to $75]

Outdoor movies galore: tonight's six films include "Back to the Future" in
McCarren Park. Doors open at 6 p.m. [Free]

Brooklyn musicians strum away at the first Prospect Heights Music Festival, at
the Waystation and the Branded Saloon. 8 p.m. [$5 suggested]

The Philharmonic brings Strauss and Tchaikovsky to Prospect Park. 8 p.m. [Free,
with fireworks]

Tickets are on sale for AMNH">an adults-only sleepover at the Museum of Natural
History. [$375]

Yankees at Indians, 7:05 p.m. (YES). Mets host Braves, 7:10 p.m. (SNY).

For more events, see The New York Times Arts & Entertainment guide.

COMMUTE

Subway  and  PATH

L.I.R.R., Metro-North, N.J. Transit, Amtrak

Roads: Check traffic map or radio report on the 1s or the 8s.

Alternate-side parking: in effect till July 28.

Air travel: La Guardia, J.F.K., Newark.

IN THE NEWS

Two men who flew a small drone near a police helicopter were arrested. [New York
Times]

A close look at the woman who left her baby in a Manhattan subway station. [New
York Times]

Officials arrested the suspect who stole a Hummer and fled to Staten Island.
[Staten Island Advance]

A NewYork Presbyterian Hospital nurse was fired for posting a graphic photo to
Instagram. [Gothamist]

Hundreds of additional officers will patrol public housing this summer. [New
York Times]

Three people aboard the Intrepid suffered injuries from an electrical
malfunction. [Daily News]

Kiehl's donated $20,000 to Planned Parenthood of New York. [DNAinfo]

The style of Southern Boulevard in the Bronx. "I'm a hip-hop kid and I can never
lose that," says one resident. [New York Times]

Meet the M.T.A. workers who retrieve your stuff when you drop it on the subway
tracks. [Animal New York]

Scoreboard: Indians beat Yankees, 5-3. Mets overpower Braves, 8-3.

Kenneth Rosen contributed reporting.

New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late
morning. You can receive it via email.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at
nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Follow the New York Today columnists, Annie Correal and Andy Newman, on Twitter.

You can always find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


