                             2109 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Motherlode)

                             July 10, 2014 Thursday

5 Ways to Teach Kids About Money at the Grocery Store

BYLINE: RON LIEBER

SECTION: US

LENGTH: 918 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â We all want things. It&#8217;s not a character flaw. But financial
savvy starts with understanding the difference between &#8220;want&#8221; and
&#8220;need.&#8221;


One of the most important lessons for children to learn about money is the
difference between wants and needs, but it's not the kind of thing that you can
just impart over the dinner table.

Children need practice. They can get it through spending their allowance or
other money that they earn, and it also comes from running commentary by parents
- continuing  narration about what the family is spending and why.

Families tend to shop for food more than any other item, so having a series of
want-need conversations at the grocery store is a fine idea. It's not something
I do that much, however, since my family buys a lot of our food online, and the
children don't always come along when we do head to the store.

So I was excited to see a blog post (linked on Lifehacker) by Shannon Ryan, who
explained how she shops out loud at the grocery store in ways any of us could
apply at home. This week, I called up the mother of two girls, ages 8 and 10, in
Manhattan Beach, Calif., where she works as a financial planner and blogs on the
side, to hear more about her tactics.

START EARLY The Ryans began when their oldest girl was 3. That seems early, but
they weren't trying to teach her to distinguish between "wants" and "needs."
Instead, they were making a point of talking out loud about shorter-term
financial goals, like saving for a vacation. They would also talk about the
things they were not going to do in order to afford the trip.

It wasn't long after, however, that Ms. Ryan began explaining what she was
buying and why while the family was at the store. "It's the age where they still
want to be like you," she said, lamenting the fact that her older daughter could
be just a year or two away from starting to tune her out.

Ms. Ryan is haunted by the stories she hears in her work as a Rotary Club
volunteer teaching teenagers about money. She often meets teenagers  whose
parents bought cars for them and never told them about car prices or the cost of
gasoline or insurance. "They just don't have even an inkling of how it all
works," she said, "and they're disabled in my mind."

JUST A LITTLE CHATTER Even at a relatively young age, the Ryan girls have only
so much interest in their mother's play-by-play. "I don't want to drone on and
on and on," she said. So depending on the store and what is on the list, she
will try to pick just two or three items to use as lessons on any given shopping
trip.

NO AUTOPILOT Needs, in the grocery context, are what you're at the store for.
They're  the things on the list. But just because they are necessary doesn't
mean they can't teach financial lessons.Like most families, the Ryans
occasionally find that some of their fresh food goes to waste. After a few
incidents of rotting green apples, Ms. Ryan had her girls add up the cost at the
store. When their haul amounted to $15.75, they were surprised that it was so
high and they stood in the aisle trying to plot how many apples everyone
actually ate.

"I could see the wheels turning," Ms. Ryan said. "And that's why lots of people
don't do it. It took a few minutes." The girls decided that it was better to buy
less and risk running out by the end of the week than to keep wasting food.

NEED FOR NUTRIENTS Often, the Ryans will stop to consider a store brand and
compare it with its name-brand equivalent. For a while now, however, they've
known that there is more to value than just price. Nutrition is a need too, and
the family tries to limit unnecessary sugar.

So when it comes time to compare ketchups, the girls check to see if the
quantities are the same and then turn the bottles over to read the ingredients.
If one product is cheaper because it has lots of corn syrup, the family pays
more for the healthier stuff.

TRY NOT TO SAY NEVER Some families have health or ethical lines that they simply
will not cross in the grocery store. But the Ryans try never to say never if
they can help it. "Is there ever a time when we could have Fruit Loops? Yes.
It's a treat,"  Ms. Ryan said, explaining how she narrates this kind of choice
to her children. "At some point, if you want it as a treat rather than dessert,
we can find an individual box."

It's easy to get caught up in the desire to speed through the aisles of any
store and get out, but Ms. Ryan encourages parents to slow down and acknowledge
their children's desires. We all want things, after all, and if your children
want a lot of things it's not some kind of character flaw. "We post jobs around
the house and try to figure out other ways for our kids to get things, but it
involves work or some other delayed gratification," she said. "Now, I often
sense them going through the steps themselves of figuring out what it would
actually take and whether it's really worth the effort before they even tell me
what they want."

Ron Lieber is the Your Money columnist for The New York Times. He is the author
of the forthcoming "The Opposite of Spoiled," about parenting, money, values and
raising the kinds of children all parents want to push out into the world, no
matter how much money they have (Harper Collins, February, 2015). He hosts
regular conversations about these topics on his Facebook pageand welcomes
comments here or privately, via his Web site. The Opposite of Spoiled appears on
Motherlode on alternating Thursdays.

Like what you're reading? Get the best of Motherlode articles, links, comments
and conversation, along with previews of posts to come, delivered each week to
your inbox. Sign up here.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


