                             215 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 12, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Viscerally Piercing the Semantic Mist

BYLINE: By BEN RATLIFF

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1524 words


LONDON -- There's a song on the singer Scott Walker's modestly terrifying new
collaboration with the drone metal group Sunn O))) called ''Herod 2014,'' and it
seems to have something like a narrative.

This is unusual for Mr. Walker, 71, an American who became famous in Britain
with the Walker Brothers in the mid-'60s, singing dance-craze numbers and
morose, easy-listening wall-of-sound ballads. (The best known was ''Make It Easy
on Yourself,'' in 1965.) As a group, the Walker Brothers were flawed almost to
the point of being nonsensical, and after 1967, Mr. Walker set upon a course of
ambitious solo records. Especially since ''Climate of Hunter'' in 1984, they
have become cultish prizes, intricate puzzles of shock, indirection,
nonresolution, theatrical uses of text and extended technique, often with a
40-piece orchestra. In an interview last month at his manager's home office
here, he told me that he was always looking for what he called a ''whoops
factor'': a moment of incomprehension on the part of the listener

Once a romantic hero, then an existential one -- blond, narrow-hipped, unsmiling
behind sunglasses -- Mr. Walker no longer has a stage persona. He hasn't
performed in public since a television appearance in 1995, and hasn't played a
concert since 1978. Whatever his music is now, it's not pop. He's a composer who
happens to use his voice, a semi-operatic baritone pushed to high and quivering
extremes, as an instrument to serve his meticulous texts, which on the new
album, ''Soused,'' include words like ''bliaut'' -- a 12th-century European
overgarment -- and ''bescumber.'' (Look it up.) And maybe something else: a
maker of abstract dramas with tones as characters. His work demands that you
come more than halfway toward his isolation, his need to do things differently,
and perhaps his story of turning from light to dark.

I would argue that ''Soused,'' which comes out Oct. 20 on the 4AD label, might
be the first music Scott Walker has made in a very long time -- maybe since his
contributions to the Walker Brothers' final record, ''Nite Flights,'' in 1978 --
that can be absorbed into the body and enjoyed as a thrill, without needing to
learn a lot of other context about his aesthetic transgressions, without
attending to the Myth of Scott. Rather than withholding musical or emotional
payoffs, which has long been his way, there's a sort of constant payoff here: no
orchestra this time, but the steady electric-guitar and bass drones of Sunn O)))
(simply pronounced sun), rich and distorted and marvelous.

In the lyrics of ''Herod,'' a woman appears to be protecting her children from
the outside world, which is full of forces that seem treacherous, skeletal,
verminous. ''She's hidden her babies away,'' he croons repeatedly. There's a
reference to ''the goon from the Stasi,'' to cr√®ches ''heaving with lush lice''
and to ''posed, high,/pelvic bridges.'' And under the carpeting drones of Sunn
O))) and various prehistoric-sounding noises, there is a small bell tone,
repeatedly struck, almost all the way through.

Mr. Walker, born Noel Scott Engel in Ohio -- the Walker Brothers were neither
Walkers nor brothers -- has lived in London for most of his life now. During our
conversation, I asked him about the bell. It's a strange thing, I said: It
becomes blotted out by the other sounds, such that you forget it's there. But it
keeps going. ''Yes,'' he said, perking up. ''Oh, I'm glad you mentioned it. I
haven't mentioned this to anyone. The bell, in a sense, is representing her.''

The mother?

''No, the, uh....'' Mr. Walker suddenly redirected the conversation. He is more
like a writer or a painter than a musician. You get the sense he'd like to be
alone with his work as soon as possible. Dressed in his regular uniform these
days of skinny jeans and military cap, he was polite and factual, and stopped
talking when he wanted to keep something to himself. But here, he felt compelled
to elucidate, if only to convey the song's meaning to me in particular, a
listener with the capability of influencing other listeners. ''The she, of
'She's hidden her babies away,' the woman, the woman image.'' Not a mother, not
even necessarily a person. The bell, he explained, is ''being suppressed, and
buried all the way through the track. I'm glad, because I was worried: Can you
still just about hear that?''

Later, I asked Mr. Walker's producer and engineer, Peter Walsh, about the bell.
(Mr. Walker has worked with Mr. Walsh exclusively since 1984, and with many of
the same musicians. When he talks about his music, he says ''we,'' or sometimes
''you,'' as in, ''There's always 40 strings on all the records, because you need
that weight.'') Mr. Walsh hadn't known about the bell's representing the woman,
but indicated that it was a ''major concern'': carefully adjusting its volume
through the mix, making it just audible.

Another major concern during the making of ''Soused,'' recalled Stephen
O'Malley, a guitarist in Sunn O))), was that the record should not sound
''epic'' -- which is funny, of course, because epic is what you're going to get
if you enlist Sunn O))). Mr. Walker likes it when instruments don't fulfill
their normative roles. So saxophones and trumpets sound like animal cries. And
guitars sound like the creation of the universe.

Mr. Walker's tendency toward protection and obscurantism runs deeper than that,
however. He doesn't communicate what the songs are ''about'' to the musicians,
or even Mr. Walsh, and only sings the lyrics in isolation, at the end of a
recording session. Mr. Walsh is possibly the only person who has seen Mr. Walker
sing in the last two decades.

The Myth of Scott includes a period of alcoholism (and strangely halfhearted
country-pop records) in the 1970s. But the word ''Soused,'' Mr. Walker
confirmed, is to be taken in its other meaning: drenched, or plunged into water.
That could have something to do with the flooding quality of the drones, the
thickness of that sound. Mr. O'Malley, 40, and Greg Anderson, 43, the principals
in Sunn O))), are serious fans of Mr. Walker. They asked him to participate on
its album ''Monoliths & Dimensions,'' from 2009, but Mr. Walker wasn't
available; subsequently, he circled back to using them on his own record.

''I'm always looking for an elemental, primal noise in my music,'' he explained.
''I thought, what's more basic, more primal, than a drone?'' It didn't take long
to make his decision. ''I figured, if I'm going to do the drone thing, they're
the kings of the drone, to me. I might as well get them.'' But interestingly --
or typically -- the decision to work with Sunn O))) wasn't necessarily about
musical sound per se. Like all Mr. Walker's decisions about his music, the words
come first. The sound is something to set the words against, a kind of cushion
to display the text. ''I love the idea of the drones,'' he said, ''because I
could get those gaps, you see, between phrases. Which I usually fill with
silence, but now I had the drones.''

Without meeting in person, without discussing how much he or the band knew of
the other's work, he provided Sunn O))) with wordless demos of the tracks that
he and Mr. Walsh made entirely with synthesizers, plotting out almost exactly
what the band was to play, Mr. O'Malley said, with great intuition about the
band's sound and style.

Sunn O))) brought its entire stage back line to London: a wall of amplifiers
variously made by Marshall, Ampeg, Hiwatt and Sunn, from whose logo the band
took its name. Mr. Walker told me that he was used to recording guitars loud in
the studio but that this was a different story. ''When you stepped into the
studio, it just came up to your knees,'' he said. ''We all had to wear earplugs
when we were in there.''

To some extent, the directive that the record not sound epic is followed in the
first seconds of the album, in the menacing track ''Brando.'' (The title, and
its refrain -- ''A beating would do me a world of good'' -- refers, Mr. Walker
explained, to how Marlon Brando seemed to get beaten up in so many of his
films.) The opening is gigantic: an organ tone; Mr. Walker belting, ''Ah, the
wide Missouri!''; and a sweeping, clear guitar line -- one that could easily be
described as epic. That guitar line is followed by another one, abrasive and
staccato and brutal, about 20 decibels louder in the mix. It's like the beating
up of epic.

I also asked about ''Fetish,'' an episodic song on the album that builds up
serious intensity three minutes in, with crashing drums and power chords, so
that you expect the singer to suddenly be singing the heart of the song. But he
doesn't: He continues with the same kind of fractured images as before. It's
startling how that frustrates the listener. Was that on purpose?

''Well, yes,'' Mr. Walker said, ''because in a sense that's what most of my
songs are about. Frustration, and failure. Sometimes, if I have a romantic lead
line, I think to myself, people are really going to like this, because they can
lock on to it. And if that starts to happen, I'll'' -- he smacked his fist --
''do something about it. Because I'm -- I'm not interested in that, basically.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/12/arts/music/soused-scott-walkers-unusual-new-al
bum-with-sunn-o-.html

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A veteran obscurantist: Scott Walker, whose album ''Soused,'' a
collaboration with Sunn O))), is due out next week. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAKE
WALTERS/CONTOUR BY GETTY IMAGES) (AR17)
 A romantic hero, and later an existential one: the musician Scott Walker in the
late 1960s. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KING COLLECTION/GETTY IMAGES) (AR20)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


