                             2147 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (ArtsBeat)

                             October 5, 2014 Sunday

'Homeland' Recap: It's Back, With Quinn in the Driver's Seat

BYLINE: JUDITH WARNER

SECTION: ARTS

LENGTH: 1192 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Exit Brody, enter Peter Quinn.


 Season 4, Episode 1, "The Drone Queen" and Episode 2, "Trylon and Perisphere"

If you're like me, you approached the start of "Homeland" Season 4 with
anticipatory disappointment, maybe even a bit of dread. How, after all, was the
show to go on with Nicholas Brody dead, hanged in a Tehran public square, legs
splayed stiff like the points on the star that Carrie later drew, in his memory,
on the heroes' wall at Langley?  How was Carrie, as a new mother, going to keep
up the sex, artisanal meds,  and all-around high drama?

Answer: Peter Quinn.

As you may or may not recall, Quinn (Rupert Friend) entered our lives in Season
2, when he was imposed upon Saul and Carrie by the C.I.A. hocho and tasked with
running the surveillance of Congressman Nicholas Brody, whom he had, in fact,
been secretly assigned to assassinate. He locked horns manfully with Carrie
(Claire Danes), got shot in the tailor's shop in Gettysburg, rose from the
seeming-dead, ripped out his I.V.'s and dropped his hospital gown to the floor
(Carrie: "Quinn! Right in front of me?") and at various points revealed that
he'd grown up on Philadelphia's Main Line, attended Harvard and been a less than
promise-keeping father.

His one-man good-cop-bad-cop routine had him guarding Carrie protectively and
pimping her out to Brody,  preparing for Brody's assassination and deciding
against it - all the while making masterful use of his facial hair to convey the
ambiguous nature of his character. (Did he have a bit of a mustache? A goatee?
Or was that just late-in-the-day shadow? One could never be quite sure.)

The central drama of Season 4 seems destined to be Quinn's choice: The moment in
the double-episode season premiere, when, surrounded by a mob of raging
Pakistanis, he used his gun to save Carrie  - and in the process turned his head
and lost the Islamabad station chief, Sandy Bachman, to the murderous crowd.

In the fallout, the contours of our new season emerge. We have the advent of
Corrupt Carrie - newly powerful, endlessly manipulative, vaguely
sexual-harassing ("Well, you're pretty enough, I'll say that for you," she tells
a pretty-boy lieutenant before he calls her a monster and almost makes her cry)
and, let's face it, not a good-enough mother.

You could argue that this quasi-"monster" of Season 4 is, in fact, the woman
that Carrie has always been - her boundaries were always fluid, she just lacked
the power to manipulate up - but I think that something has deeply changed. If,
in the Brody days, Carrie wanted nothing more than the truth, now, in pursuit of
a useful truth, she's quite willing to engage in big lies: whether to produce a
good "story" to cover Sandy's death or to keep her baby far away.  After finding
reason after reason not to be with her infant - whose red hair looks like
Brody's - her sister says, chillingly, "There's not even a diagnosis for what's
wrong with you."

It's hard to disagree.

Quinn, on the other hand, persistently ambiguous facial hair aside (am I crazy,
or did he actually have less dark growth after Sandy was beaten to death than
earlier in the day?), appears now to have shed all vestiges of his black-ops
madman self for pure white knight. I know we're meant to expect sexual fireworks
- it was foreshadowed, after all, way back when that hospital gown fell to the
floor - but I wonder at this point if all the fun will reside in a long,
drawn-out unrequited dance.

The convention requires romantic detours. But Quinn's first stateside sexual
encounter - a drunken tryst seemingly fueled more by despair than desire -  is
profoundly weird, and more than a little disturbing. One minute, our black-ops
tough guy is  on a lounge chair, so drunk he can do nothing but slither
helplessly, and the next, he's underneath a lady twice his size, with a really
creepy smile on his face that could, frankly, be a rictus of pure fear. Beyond
the politics of using a fat woman as a virtue-enhancer (or a sight gag), what
was the scene supposed to convey?

We already know that Quinn has a tendency toward passive aggression. Carrie hurt
him badly by not saying thank you after he sacrificed Sandy to save her life.
He's paying her back right now by playing hard to get, not wanting to go back
with her to Islamabad and all.  The Times's  Alessandra Stanley writes, "It's
been clear for a while that her will is stronger than his."   But that may
change. We know Quinn has it in him to be an all-out bad guy. After all, we've
seen him smoking. And let's recall that, before shooting out the rear window,
ramming the car into reverse and saving Carrie's life on that Islamabad street,
he seemed to point his gun at her head.

Dodge or die. That's true love, "Homeland"-style.

Some questions as we move forward, in no particular order:

Why does the actor Corey Stoll keep getting bumped off? I enjoyed him all too
briefly as Representative Peter Russo (D-Pa.) in "House of Cards," and was just
gearing up for some quality time with the "jolie-laid" (I know, I know, it's
usually jolie-laide)  Islamabad station chief, when his poor bald head was
bashed in. What a piteous yelp he let out!  Was it my imagination, or did he cry
out: "Quinn! Quinn!" as the crowd carried him away? Will we ever find out if he
received a response to his last text? And what will the line, "Is a normal bowel
movement too much to ask for?" do to the rest of his career?

Why  is Episode 2 called "Trylon and Perisphere"? Obsessive Googling yielded
that these were two iconic structures at the 1939 New York World's Fair. The
Trylon was a kind of cut-rate Washington Monument, and the Perisphere a big
white ball that housed a mini-utopia called Democracity. Both were destroyed
after the fair ended and their materials repurposed as World War II armaments.
I'm usually pretty good at figuring these things out, but am simply stumped
here.

Why does Carrie's sister say, "It can't come as a surprise to you" that their
dad isn't "pitching in" with the baby as much as he'd promised?  After all, he's
the only one who was there for Carrie after her mother, claiming a CVS errand,
bolted. (In her defense: I find it altogether plausible that someone could set
out for a CVS and, with all the best of intentions, never return. I myself have
come very close to spontaneously combusting while watching a store manager issue
a "rain check." Carrie may be judging her mother too harshly on this score.)

And - Aayan Ibrahim, the nephew of Haissam Haqqani, the Taliban leader. Is he
going to stay so very tiresome? I know it's nice that the "Homeland" folks have
served up an unimpeachably good-guy Muslim; even the C.I.A. director, Lockhart,
says he's a stand-up guy,  huge praise from a man who never has a nice word for
anyone.  Aayan and his medical-student girlfriend are loaded with significance -
think of Saul's lament over all the good we could have done had we stayed on the
ground in Afghanistan.  And he may be  our only hope for Peace on Earth and all
that, but he's just so annoying with his sadness, quiet dignity and unflinching
nobility. All I can say is: He better have something interesting  hidden in that
duffle bag.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


