                              21 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                              June 22, 2014 Sunday

Smile! A Drone Is About to Take Your Picture

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 1010 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â New products and social media services have arisen to help people
take better pictures of themselves with the aid of flying robits.


If you present people with a new, exciting technology, chances are they will use
it to take photographs of themselves.

Take drones, those hovering, helicopterlike flying devices that the military has
used for years and that are slowly, in miniaturized form, finding their way into
the consumer world.

Over the last few years, drones have been finding jobs in industry. They are
used for gathering news, checking crops on farms, as well as photographing
houses for real estate agents, and - at least in the imaginations of some Amazon
executives - drones will one day deliver packages to consumers who just can't
wait for the UPS truck.

Yet mainstream users have had trouble figuring out where an unmanned aerial
vehicles fits into their lives.

It looks as if we may have an answer, and it's some serious stuff: Among the
first mainstream uses for drones will be airborne selfies.

Recently, a number of new products and social media services have popped up, in
a noble effort to help people take better pictures and videos of themselves with
the aid of a drone.

Last week, two drones made their debuts on the crowdfunding site Kickstarter,
both designed to allow people to shoot drone selfies, or dronies (that is, a
selfie shot via drone).

The Hexo Plus, which comes with the tagline, "Your Autonomous Aerial Camera," is
compatible with a GoPro camera and is billed as an "intelligent drone that
follows and films you autonomously." A competitor, called the AirDog, treats a
drone like a dog on a leash, tracking and following you wherever you go and
snapping video and pictures of you as you do action sports.

Based on sales, consumers seem eager to buy these kinds of products. Hexo Plus
hoped to raise $50,000 on Kickstarter. In three days, it passed $700,000, or
1,300 percent more than its goal. AirDog quickly flew past its $200,000 target,
too.

The drone selfie movement even had its modern Gilded Age moment when the Marquee
Dayclub, at the Cosmopolitan hotel in Las Vegas, announced a new type of bottle
service where patrons in bikinis at an outdoor pool can have their drinks
delivered via a drone. Then it's time to smile for the camera as your drink
delivery vehicle snaps a picture. The price is a cool $20,000, but imagine how
many likes you'll get on Instagram.

Putting the cost aside, the idea of a drone going about its business over a
crowded club (even if an outdoor club) seems a bit risky - not to mention that
it poses all sorts of etiquette questions about tipping. Representatives from
Marquee did not respond to a request for comment.

I should note that this isn't the first drone drink delivery service. In a fine
example of entrepreneurialism and innovation meeting a market need, a local
brewery in Minnesota sought to airlift cases of beer to ice fishermen this year.
The Federal Aviation Administration put the kibosh on the idea, saying the
service would break commercial drone use laws.

Drink delivery, clever as it is, seems to be an outlier for drones. These days,
it's all about the selfie.

At the Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity this week, Twitter
showed off a company-sponsored account, Dronie, which let people at the festival
take free drone selfie videos.

Hello to @jmaheu46 from @jpmaheu @cyrilpersane @laurentbuanec @paulwoolmington!
#CannesLions space #selfie https://t.co/nHb6hqgfzs

- Dronie (@dronie)19 Jun 14

From a photography standpoint, this all sounds wonderful. "Having a drone with a
camera on it feels like you have a giant tripod in the sky," said Amit Gupta,
the founder of the online photography store Photojojo.

But take it from me, the drone craze is not all $20,000 bottle service and
aerial photos of the bald spot on top of your head.

When I tried to fly a drone recently, it was as difficult as the first time I
drove a car. I crashed drones into the San Francisco Bay, concrete sidewalks,
trees and walls, and though I didn't hit any innocent bystanders, I did fly one
into myself a couple of times. Luckily, I was uninjured. (My pride, however,
remains bruised.)

Drones sometimes crash into other people, too. In April, a runner at the West
Australian triathlon was hit on the head by a drone that was being used to
photograph the event. The Sydney Morning Herald described the injury as a "river
of blood." Last year, a drone crashed into a crowd in Virginia, injuring
spectators, and another crashed into a crowd at the Coachella music festival.
(How many people were hurt was unclear.) And there have been several reports of
drones almost colliding with commercial and private planes.

And that doesn't even include the deaths that involve toy helicopters, close
cousins of drones.

"When things go wrong with a drone, the operator should be held accountable,"
said Michael Toscano, president and chief executive of the Association for
Unmanned Vehicle Systems International, a nonprofit group devoted to advancing
the unmanned systems and robotics community. He suggested that the F.A.A.
require that people take a short online course before they can fly a drone in a
public place, almost like a miniature pilot's license.

Under the Modernization and Reform Act of 2012, Congress asked the agency to
develop of safety guidelines that would enable the use of drones in American
skies by September 2015. The F.A.A. did not respond to a request for comment.

Last year, Senator Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, warned the
F.A.A. that it needed to figure out regulations for drone use before the skies
were filled with thousands of little flying copters, affecting people's privacy
and safety.

But Ryan Calo, an assistant professor at the University of Washington School of
Law, who specializes in robotics and drones, said the accidents that were
occurring from private use of drones would become less common as the vehicles
became safer and more autonomous. For now, fly with caution.

"From a product liability standpoint, it's pretty straightforward," he said.
"You buy this thing, you fly it, it's likely your fault if something goes
wrong."

Email: bilton@nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


