                             2115 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                             July 24, 2014 Thursday

Today in Small Business: Chief Happiness Officer

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 718 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â The owner of the Denver Broncos offers a sad reminder on the
importance of succession planning.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

The International Monetary Fund cuts its gross domestic product forecast for the
United States from 2 percent to 1.7 percent.

James Pethokoukis warns that even the best case scenario for United States debt
would be historically terrible.

The second quarter of 2014 marked the second consecutive quarter of solid
revenue growth for middle market companies.

Employees

Here's what's wrong with appointing a chief happiness officer.

Debating whether there should be a law limiting unpredictable schedules for
hourly and part-time workers.

Here's how to identify, report and prevent workplace violence.

After the chief executive of Market Basket, a New England supermarket chain, is
fired, thousands of workers walk off the job in protest - with some getting
fired themselves.

The average small-business paycheck has gone up.

Around the Country

An Oregon summer camp teaches students about sales, loans and charity.

Portland, Ore., could be America's "most Airbnb-friendly" city.

A man is suing the employees of a pizzeria who tackled him and wrestled his gun
away during his attempted robbery.

CBS is keeping Stephen Colbert's "Late Show" in New York after a tax-for-jobs
deal.

The Small Business Administration has awarded Fayetteville State University's
Veterans Business Outreach Center two grants of $245,000.

With a rocky start, Washington State may fall short short of its projected tax
income from marijuana sales.

Around the World

Israeli tech talent is being tapped to fight in Gaza.

An advertising watchdog in Britain has concluded that pyramid-shaped tea bags
are more efficient than round ones.

Social Media

Facebook revenue surged to $2.91 billion in the second quarter.

A dad's tweet causes his family to be kicked off a Southwest Airlines flight
temporarily.

Energy

Which states would benefit most from the Obama administration's proposed carbon
regulations? The big winners would include Texas and Oklahoma.

Here's why Australia nixed its carbon tax.

And here's an argument for relaxing America's ban on crude-oil exports.

Washington

The Senate agrees on an $11 billion highway funding measure.

The Senate has also advanced an election-year bill limiting tax breaks for
companies that move operations overseas.

Ideas

Apparently, America has pent-up demand for a battery-powered Inspector Gadget
cooler.

A new app handles online emergency room appointments.

Entrepreneurship

A "professional line sitter" can make up to $1,000 a week.

High-tech urban farms are popping up around the world, including in old
warehouses and semi-conductor factories and on the roofs of commercial
buildings.

Management

The owner of the Denver Broncos relinquishes control of the organization because
of his battle with Alzheimer's disease - and offers a reminder on the importance
of succession planning.

General Motors issues its 60th recall, bringing the year's total to 29.7 million
cars.

Here's how to make your company's shipping process more efficient.

Here are five common negotiating mistakes.

Retail

A study finds that the more informed customers are, the more likely they are to
choose "Brand X."

The National Retail Federation trims its sales forecast for the year.

Consumer traffic to restaurants in the United States has flattened, according to
the NPD Group.

Advertising

Ryder releases a new campaign to tell businesses than it can help manage their
fleets and supply-chain functions better than they can by themselves.

Finance

Jon Stewart starts a $10 billion Kickstarter campaign to buy CNN.

Women who own small businesses are still far behind their male counterparts when
it comes to getting loans and government contracts, according to a Congressional
report.

Online

Online marketing service Infusionsoft continues its record-breaking growth.

One accounting service, Freshbooks, raises $30 million, while another, Xero,
sees an 80 percent growth in revenue and is "spooking" Intuit, according to its
chief executive.

Opportunities

A start-up raises $25 million to help bring more commercial drones to market.

Researchers say they can now print electronic memory on paper.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


