                             2149 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (Times Insider)

                            October 10, 2014 Friday

What We're Reading

BYLINE: INSIDER STAFF

LENGTH: 476 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Recommended reads from New York Times reporters and editors,
highlighting great stories from around the web.


 Recommended reads from New York Times reporters and editors, highlighting great
stories from around the web.

Grantland

Reports of the Death of Baseball Have Been Greatly Exaggerated

Does this sound familiar? "Somehow or other, they don't play ball nowadays as
they used to some eight or ten years ago." Or this: "Oh, give us the glorious
matches of old, when love of true sport made them great." How about: "The rage
for base ball appears to be dying out." The tenor of the language - not to
mention the separate words "base" and "ball" - is the giveaway. Each of those
quotations come from the 19th century, and each fits into a popular theme for
writers and players alike: Baseball is in trouble and may even be dying. In a
delightful essay for Grantland, Bryan Curtis - with help from the historian John
Thorn - explains why death-of-baseball articles are so common and so wrong. The
piece even has an angst-ridden quotation from the so-called golden age of the
1950s, when, by the way, average attendance was around 13,000. It was more than
30,000 this year. - David Leonhardt

The Washington Post

Too Many Orphans

There's so much great reporting coming out of the West African Ebola crisis -
including terrific stories from The New York Times - that it's hard to pick just
one. But Lenny Bernstein and Gail Sullivan have pulled together a compelling
look at Ebola orphans; children in bad-luck lands that have too many orphans
already, and now are struggling to address a new group of bereaved children. -
John Schwartz

New York Magazine

The Flying Machines That Are Turning Us Into Superheroes

Drones are one of the most exciting - and terrifying - recent developments in
technology. They can fire missiles, take selfies and drop first aid, and we've
only begun to see what they can be programmed to do. This piece lays it all out
- and makes a convincing case for why they may soon be as ubiquitous as the
smartphone. - Jenna Wortham

NPR

The Nip and Tuck in Brazil

More cosmetic surgeries are performed in Brazil than in any other country; some
hospitals even offer subsidized procedures for people with lower incomes.
Through this series of portraits, NPR offers a fascinating look into the
thinking of seven Brazilian women who have gone under the knife and into the
pressure that perceived beauty standards put on women of all ages. - Erika Allen

Boing Boing

Early Gonzo

Looking for a little hilarity? Here is the cover letter sent by Hunter Thompson
when he applied for a job at The Vancouver Sun in 1958. I'm not sure Thompson
was sober when he crafted this, but give him credit for honesty. He writes:
"It's a damned shame that a field as potentially dynamic and vital as journalism
should be overrun with dullards, bums, and hacks, hag-ridden with myopia,
apathy, and complacence, and generally stuck in a bog of stagnant mediocrity." -
Dave Smith

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


