                             2110 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (City Room)

                            July 16, 2014 Wednesday

New York Today: Weather People

BYLINE: ANNIE CORREAL

SECTION: NYREGION

LENGTH: 706 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â What you need to know for Wednesday: Storm spotters, some final
showers, and the mayor appears on &#8220;The Colbert Report.&#8221;


 Good morning on this still wet Wednesday.

On Tuesday, the National Weather Service tweeted, "Eeek!"

The message appeared on Twitter at 8:50 p.m., as another round of thunderstorms
hit Long Island.

It continued: "Lots of rumbles and cloud to ground lightning here at the office!
Yes, we stayed indoors!!"

The tweet came from the National Weather Service office in Upton, N.Y.

For up-to-the-minute information on severe weather, like the kind we've had this
week, meteorologists at that office rely on reports from 1,600 volunteer weather
spotters across the region.

Lauren Nash, a meteorologist, explained.

The spotters - who are laypeople - call in from the Lower Hudson Valley,
Southern Connecticut, Northern New Jersey, Long Island and New York.

Officially, they are known as Skywarn Spotters.

To earn the title, they attend a training session on severe weather and learn
skills "like how to tell between a wall cloud and a funnel cloud," Ms. Nash
said.

Along with a Spotter ID, they are given "a special phone number that only
spotters have" to reach the National Weather Service.

During this storm, spotters reported flooding and ponding, and lots of
lightning, like in Belmar, N.J., where there were 4,000 strikes in an hour.

(It was Ms. Nash, incidentally, who posted the unusual tweet. She said she was
"just letting people know we had a thunderstorm.")

Here's what else you need to know.

WEATHER

A moody mix: fog, more rain, then cloudy skies, then maybe some sun, with a high
of 83.

COMING UP TODAY

Volunteers meet at Barclays Center to canvas about Paid Sick Leave, which
employees can use starting July 30. 7:45 a.m.

Mayor de Blasio appears on "The Colbert Report." 11:30 p.m.

Advocates and residents propose ways to reinvent the M.T.A. in Midtown. 9 a.m.
to 8 p.m. [Livestream]

Hip-hop pioneers announce plans for the first International Hip-Hop Parade next
month at Salsa Caterers in the Bronx. 11 a.m.

If you see a very scantily clad pedicab driver in Manhattan, he or she may be
promoting "Dating Naked," a new VH1 reality series.

The Space and Science Festival, which commemorates the 45th anniversary of the
moon landing, kicks off at the Intrepid. 11:30 a.m. [$22]

Well-known strangers ask one another questions at "Ask Roulette" at the Housing
Works bookstore in SoHo. This round includes NY1's Pat Kiernan.  7 p.m. [Free]

War correspondents talk about the legacy of the photographer Chris Hondros at
the Brooklyn Brewery. 7:30 p.m. [$25, with free beer]

James Taylor playsat Jones Beach. 8 p.m. [$26 and up]

For more events, see The New York Times Arts & Entertainment guide.

COMMUTE

Subway  and  PATH

L.I.R.R., Metro-North, N.J. Transit, Amtrak

Roads: Check traffic map or radio report on the 1s or the 8s.

Alternate-side parking: in effect till July 28.

Air travel: La Guardia, J.F.K., Newark.

IN THE NEWS

With a strike looming, L.I.R.R. workers prepare for life on the picket line.
[New York Times]

Gov. Chris Christie will test his presidential hopes on a trip to Iowa. [New
York Times]

A four-year-old went to the City Clerk's Office to offer her services as a
flower girl. [NBC]

A law professor answered questions on the legality of drones in the city. [WNYC]

The former New York Times executive editor Jill Abramson gave her first
interview to Cosmopolitan saying she wanted "to speak very candidly to young
women." [Cosmopolitan]

Health Department officials found mosquitoes carrying the West Nile virus in
Staten Island and Queens. [DNAinfo]

More than 900 data breaches were reported in the city last year. [New York
Times]

A female firefighter appears in the Fire Department's calendar for the first
time. [Daily News]

The police say rooftop sensors will help them combat gun violence. [Verge]

Australians are part of the local coffee scene. []

Kenneth Rosen contributed reporting.

New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late
morning. You can receive it via email.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at
nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Follow the New York Today columnists, Annie Correal and Andy Newman, on Twitter.

You can always find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


