                             212 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Drone Hits Pakistan for 2nd Time in 12 Hours

BYLINE: By DECLAN WALSH and ISMAIL KHAN; Declan Walsh reported from London, and
Ismail Khan from Peshawar, Pakistan. Salman Masood contributed reporting from
Islamabad, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 794 words


LONDON -- An American drone struck a militant compound in Pakistan's tribal belt
for the second time in 12 hours on Thursday, killing at least 10 suspected
members of the Haqqani network in a suddenly intense resurgence of the C.I.A.
offensive in Pakistan.

The American drone strikes, after an almost six-month lull in the operations
while Pakistani officials tried and failed to negotiate a peace deal with the
Taliban, come as Pakistan is mulling a new offensive of its own against
militants in the northwestern tribal belt. But early news reports on Thursday
offered conflicting comments about whether the Pakistani authorities might have
approved the drone strikes or worked in tandem with the Americans -- a
politically caustic idea in a country where the C.I.A. program is widely hated.

The strikes, both of which were reported to have killed Haqqani operatives, also
came two weeks after the release of the American soldier Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, who
had been a hostage of the Haqqanis for five years. A former American military
commander has suggested that Sergeant Bergdahl's safety will give the United
States more freedom to strike at the Haqqanis, who are fighting to overthrow the
American-backed civilian government in Afghanistan.

Pakistani security officials said Thursday that a C.I.A. drone had fired six
missiles at the compound four miles north of Miram Shah, the main town in North
Waziristan. The attack, which occurred just after 2 a.m. on Thursday, targeted a
building and an explosives-laden truck parked outside, they said.

Seven hours earlier, an American attack on the same compound had killed at least
four people. Initial reports from that attack described the dead as mostly
ethnic Uzbek fighters, but the second strike appeared to have been aimed
squarely at the Haqqani militants.

The Haqqani group, led by Sirajuddin Haqqani, has carried out numerous attacks
on American and Afghan security forces, as well as hotels and embassies in
Kabul, the Afghan capital. The group's strength derives in part from its
sanctuary in North Waziristan, where it is believed to have held Sergeant
Bergdahl for much of his five years in captivity, until his release on May 31 in
exchange for five Taliban commanders held at Guant√°namo Bay, Cuba.

The attacks on Wednesday and Thursday were an emphatic resumption of the
American drone program in Pakistan's tribal belt after a nearly six-month
hiatus. The last known C.I.A. strike inside Pakistan took place on Dec. 25.

American drone strikes are deeply unpopular in Pakistan and are usually met with
vehement criticism from the government, which on Thursday issued a pro forma
statement that condemned both attacks as a ''violation of Pakistan's sovereignty
and territorial integrity.'' Still, the strike received no mention from
lawmakers during national assembly proceedings on Thursday.

In private, some Pakistani officials say they quietly support drone strikes when
they suit Pakistan's perceived self-interest. On Thursday, Reuters quoted two
unnamed Pakistani government officials who described the latest strikes as a
''joint Pakistan-U.S. operation'' that, they said, had the ''express approval''
of the Pakistani government.

But a senior Pakistani security official, speaking on the condition of
anonymity, insisted that the actions did not have prior approval from the
Pakistani authorities.

The long lull in C.I.A. strikes coincided with a concerted effort by Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif's government to draw the Pakistani Taliban into peace
talks. But that effort has all but collapsed in recent weeks, undercut by
tensions between Mr. Sharif and the military leadership and by a damaging
leadership split in the Taliban ranks.

Moreover, an audacious Taliban assault on the Karachi airport on Sunday,
resulting in 36 deaths, bolstered public support for a military operation. Any
military operation is a political risk for Mr. Sharif, who fears a violent
backlash in his home province, Punjab. His main political rival, the former
cricket star Imran Khan, has been a strident critic of both American drone
strikes and Pakistani military operations.

But in the days since the Karachi attack, military officials have hinted that
plans are underway for a major operation, most likely in Waziristan. And the
collapse of peace talks with the Taliban forced even Mr. Khan to concede, some
weeks earlier, that force should be used against militants who refuse to lay
down their weapons.

The Pakistani Taliban presented the Karachi airport assault as a joint operation
with the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, which has firmly established itself in
the jihadi firmament of Waziristan since September 2011. Pakistani officials
said that at least three Uzbek fighters died in the C.I.A. strike on Wednesday
night.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/13/world/asia/pakistan.html

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


