                             2114 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            July 23, 2014 Wednesday

Today in Small Business: Amazon's 'Unbreachable Moat'

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 607 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â A Miami diner that was a pioneer in race relations closes after six
decades. After many strike-outs, an entrepreneur hits a $44 million home run.
And how Comcast trains its customer service representatives.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

Sales of existing homes hit their fastest pace since October.

Casino operators are changing blackjack payouts to give the house an even
greater advantage - a sign that the economy in Las Vegas may be improving.

Customer Service

An internal Comcast memo defends that now-famous customer service
representative.

Facebook scores low in a customer-satisfaction survey.

Start-Up

A marketing analytics start-up led by former physicists raises $12 million.

Health Care

Ezra Klein writes that Tuesday's appellate court ruling against the Affordable
Care Act is "plainly ridiculous" - and that the "Supreme Court simply isn't
going to rip insurance from tens of millions of people in order to teach
Congress a lesson about grammar."

Around the Country

A Miami diner that was a pioneer in race relations closes after six decades.

Almost 5 percent of New Yorkers are millionaires and here are the 10 richest
counties in America.

A man with a sock full of money is suspected of swindling a New Jersey business
owner.

A Brooklyn bar owner is sentenced to prison after swindling 100 wedding couples.

In Virginia, a 220-year-old mill still produces stone-ground grits, flour and
meal.

Virginia's governor signed an executive order requiring state agencies to award
more than 42 percent of contracts to small businesses.

Retailing

Chipotle's executives say they are experimenting with "really small, scrappy"
restaurants.

As its Prime membership becomes retailing's most "unbreachable moat," Amazon
unveils a new service for managing payments.

But for brick-and-mortar retailers, maybe there is a way to beat "showrooming."

Employees

Here is why the 9-to-5 workday is practically an invitation to ethical lapses.

President Obama signs a new job-training law.

Apple is hit with a class-action lawsuit over unpaid wages.

There is evidence that big stores and big chains pay employees more than small
businesses do.

Ideas

Two parents are hoping to sell safe and practical tableware for children.

An eccentric taxidermist has designed a collection of macabre fashion
accessories using animal corpses.

A law firm adds a drone practice.

Around the World

A new consumer protection law in France is intended to inform restaurant patrons
whether a dish is fait maison - made in the house - or prepared elsewhere.

The Federal Aviation Administration halts all American flights to Israel.

EBay announces plans to extend credit to small businesses through its PayPal
subsidiary.

Online

More than 500 URLs have been sold for $1 million or more.

The United States joins six other countries in achieving 100 percent mobile or
wireless data penetration, or both.

Entrepreneurship

After many strike-outs, an entrepreneur hits a $44 million home run.

Social Media

LinkedIn acquires a business-to-business advertising company.

Here are eight types of tweets that generate engagement.

The number of employers declining to hire applicants because of social media
posts continues to rise, according to a survey.

Opportunities

Google plans to give away $1 million to a group that creates a smaller and
cheaper power inverter.

A newly formed unit of Universal Music Group is scouring YouTube channels to
find the next big recording star.

Technology

Apple reports a $7.7 billion profit on strong iPhone sales.

Verizon's profit improves sharply, thanks to tablet sales.

A group of ex-Googlers are building cloud software that is almost impossible to
take down.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


