                             2121 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (Times Insider)

                            August 6, 2014 Wednesday

When Home Is a War Zone

BYLINE: Fares Akram

LENGTH: 760 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Fares Akram, a Palestinian working as a Times stringer in the Gaza
Strip, describes what it is like to report on a conflict that has direct impact
on him and his family


Fares Akram is a Palestinian journalist working as a stringer for The Times in
the Gaza Strip, where he lives with his family. We asked him what it is like to
report on a conflict that has direct impact on him and his family.

GAZA CITY - When I'm overwhelmed with my work, a phone call from my wife, Alaa,
makes my moment. But lately, it can also terrify me. I have been reporting
around the clock for more than three weeks as Israel carries out its military
operation in Gaza, and when I see my wife's name on my mobile phone's screen, I
expect the worst.

So far, nothing bad has happened to her or my two daughters, who are 5 and 3.
But my worries are not only for them. I also fear for my mother and siblings. We
suffered the loss of my father, Akram Al-Ghoul, in Israel's three-week Operation
Cast Lead in Gaza, which ended in January 2009.

My father was a judge, serving in the Palestinian Authority, the body that
notionally administers the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and was long envisioned
as the building block for the government of a future Palestinian state. He was
not affiliated with Hamas, the militant group that dominates Gaza and is locked
in conflict with Israel. He was killed when an airstrike hit our farmhouse in
the northern Gaza Strip.

It's different to report from Gaza when you are a Palestinian living there. My
colleagues Steven Erlanger, Anne Barnard and Ben Hubbard have been working in
shifts to cover the operation and Jodi Rudoren, the Jerusalem bureau chief, is
here now. They come for some days, knowing when they are going to leave, while I
stay here just waiting for the war to end.

Since the story of Gaza is my story too - like most Palestinians here, I cannot
leave except with permits that are difficult to get - I work hard to manage my
own feelings and experiences. I tap into them for the empathy and knowledge
needed for any good journalism, but also set them aside when necessary to
maintain my fairness and rigor as a reporter.

The main problem for me, and for all Gazans here, is finding a safe place. At
the start of this operation, Israel warned residents of the eastern and northern
Gaza Strip to evacuate from their homes and go west or south. But while
reporting, we have seen many examples of deadly bombings in places that,
according to warning leaflets dropped by the Israelis, were supposed to be safe
havens: United Nations-run schools, and the streets and apartment buildings of
downtown Gaza City.

As a father, I'm always thinking about my girls. I'm always worried, taking
measures to try to make sure they are safe, and wondering if, on any given day,
I have done the right thing. Sometimes we stay in our own home; sometimes we
move into my wife's family's home, depending on potential threats. It is often a
matter of guesswork.

Every ride is risky. About 14 days ago, Anne Barnard and I were on our way to
look into the death of a family of 26 in Khan Younis, in southern Gaza. As we
drove on a main road, we saw some families fleeing from the east under artillery
fire. We stepped out of the car, and while we were talking to the people, a
shell hit nearby. As we fled in our car, another shell landed just behind us -
so close that we felt the concussion, saw the dust cloud and heard shrapnel tap
on the roof.

Another challenge is communicating with Hamas officials. As a party to the
conflict, they should be available for interviews, to respond to questions about
whether their tactics are appropriate, effective or enjoy popular support. But
because of security concerns, they have disappeared. Only a spokesman, Sami Abu
Zuhri, has been regularly available, but he doesn't give you much.

Reporting on Hamas on the ground is even harder. Militants are Israel's declared
targets, so trying to get close to them endangers us. Those not in hiding are
fighting on the front lines. We cannot reach those areas because they are under
heavy shelling. Also, the militants who may be firing rockets away from the
front lines do so with great caution, trying to hide from the drones that scour
Gaza hunting for them. They are also wary of the public, fearing informers.

Right now there is a cease-fire, but its sustainability is pending uneasy,
indirect negotiations in Cairo between Palestinian groups and Israel, so another
surge of fighting is not unexpected.

Humanitarian pauses have meant a lot to me. I race against time to take
advantage of these breaks: I report on the movement of people in the first hours
and then rush to take my family out for a ride in the time remaining.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


