                             2154 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (Times Insider)

                            October 24, 2014 Friday

Hoverboards: A Story 25 Years in the Making

BYLINE: CONOR DOUGHERTY

LENGTH: 717 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â An article about hoverboards took a reporter a lot of work, a little
luck and 25 years of skateboarding injuries.


 Conor Dougherty, the Times's Google and technology reporter, has spent years
working skateboarding into newspaper articles. His story this week about the
realization of the hovercraft is a happy marriage of his decades-long hobby and
his Times beat.

Good stories take a lot of work and a lot of luck. For me it was a lot of work,
a lot of luck - along with 25 years of skateboarding.

Skateboarding is my pastime, but it is not and has never been my beat. Still,
I've spent my entire journalism career trying to weasel it into every paper I've
worked for.

In 2003, when I was at the San Diego Union-Tribune, I wrote a front-page story
about the years of harassment suffered by the maker of an anti-skateboarding
device called "skatestoppers." I left that paper for The Wall Street Journal,
where, I'm proud to say, I wrote three front-page stories about skateboarding,
including my swan song, which was about yuppie commuters on electric
skateboards.

I started at The New York Times a few months after that story ran, and the
hoverboard piece began on day one. That's because an editor on the Styles desk,
Katherine Rosman (a dear friend that I worked with at the WSJ), warned our
orientation class that I would, at some point, try to get skateboarding onto the
Times's front page. I responded that not only would I do it, I would do it
within a year (it took a little under three months).

There was, of course, that old familiar problem, which is that skateboarding is
not my beat. But that got solved about a week later when I made my first visit
to Google's headquarters in Mountain View, Calif.

The Mountain View trip was for me to get acquainted with the company. Sometime
in the late morning, I met the public relations team for Google X, which is
where Google does most of its sci-fi stuff, like Google Glass. It's where the
company is developing self-driving cars and a drone delivery serviced called
Project Wing. Somewhat offhandedly, one of Google X's P.R. people told me that
she had seen my earlier stories about skateboarding.

She mentioned that Rich DeVaul - a senior engineer who skates, surfs and
snowboards - had tried to make a hoverboard but had abandoned the project. I
instantly knew I had a story.

The first "Back to the Future" was a big moment for skateboarding. Sean
Mortimer, a writer, has said he started skating after he saw "Back to the
Future", and Lance Mountain, a legendary skate pro, reported that in 1985, when
the film came out, his monthly royalty checks jumped to $20,000.

The hoverboard was introduced in "Back to the Future Part II." And after more
than 25-years of skateboarding, I knew there was a rich history of people trying
and failing to build one. I knew that garage tinkerers like Dustin Rubio had
been building hovercraft skateboards for years, and that a few small inventors
had tried to commercialize hoverboard-like products.

I also talked to Bob Gale, who wrote the "Back to the Future" trilogy. In
addition to some great back story on how he and Robert Zemeckis came up with the
board, Mr. Gale passed along a couple of fan letters that young boys (they were
almost all boys) had written to Universal Studios in 1989.

Skateboarding is about being a kid, and the letters captured that. Through poor
handwriting and experimental grammar, they conveyed the childish excitement I
reconnect with each time I get on my board.

The letters put me right back in 1989 - and featured kids in their own words. It
would have been impossible to capture this in a few lines, so we created a slide
show with a few of the letters.

I thought it would be really cool to track one of these kids down and as an
adult and interview him. I spent the good part of a Saturday tracking down Dave
Mertes, and once I found him - and confirmed that he was indeed the same Dave
Mertes from the 1989 letter - I knew he would be my kicker (the last line of the
story).

So far, I've talked a lot about skateboarding and hard work. But, as I said
before, good stories need some luck. About a week before my hoverboard deadline,
I got a call from a representative of Arx Pax, maker of the Hendo Hoverboard.
They had heard I was working on a story about hoverboards, that they had a real
one, and offered to let me ride it.

I had only one question: Can we do video?

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


