                             2156 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (ArtsBeat)

                           October 29, 2014 Wednesday

Seattle Sorts Library Books Faster than New York? Fuhgeddaboudit

BYLINE: JENNIFER SCHUESSLER

SECTION: ARTS

LENGTH: 347 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â New York&#8217;s library book sorter has proven itself superior to
one in Washington state is a friendly competition this year.


New York has been taking some hard knocks from Seattle of late, books-wise.
First came the epic and still-unresolved battle between Amazon and New York
publishers. Then came reports - in a respectable New York newspaper, no less -
that Seattle's indie booksellers were thriving while Manhattan was turning into
a "bookstore desert."

But on Wednesday, New York reasserted its dominance in at least one corner of
the literary universe: book sorting.

In the fourth annual "battle of the book sorters," the giant mechanical sorter
shared by the New York Public Library and the Brooklyn Public Library sorted
12,570 items in an hour, while a similar behemoth belonging to the King County
Library System in Washington state sorted a mere 11,868.

"The laid-back atmosphere of Seattle got a real taste of  fast-paced New York
today," said Salvatore Magaddino, the deputy director of the Book Ops facility
in Queens, which houses New York's $2.4 million, 238-foot-long sorter. "We
proved to our friends and to the world  that we are the fastest sorters, which
means our patrons get their books faster than anyone!"

The outcome also means that Mr. Magaddino and his colleagues will soon be
feasting on smoked salmon and Seattle's Best Coffee, which had been wagered
against Junior's cheesecake and pastries from Ferrara's. (Seattle won last
year's smackdown.)

The New York and Seattle sorters, the only two in the United States according to
a spokesman from the New York Public Library, scan bar codes on returned books
as they whiz around a circular conveyor belt. The books are then dropped into
bins destined for the appropriate branch library, like riders ejected from a
particularly nerdy roller-coaster. (Yes, someone has filmed the process using a
drone.)

The New York sorter's normal average speed, according to a news release, is 3.5
miles an hour, with roughly 8,000 items sorted an hour, with a 1 percent error
rate, and most books returned to circulation within 24 hours. Before the
purchase of the sorter in 2010, the New York Public Library sorted books by
hand.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


