                             2120 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (After Deadline)

                             August 5, 2014 Tuesday

Subject, Meet Verb

BYLINE: PHILIP B. CORBETT

SECTION: TIMESTOPICS

LENGTH: 1601 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Time for another exasperated reminder that a singular subject needs a
singular verb, and a plural subject needs &#8230; well, you know.


Time for another exasperated reminder that a singular subject needs a singular
verb, and a plural subject needs ... well, you know.

Here are some recent examples, culled by a colleague over just a week or so.

In each of the 65 countries where it operates, the Peace Corps has at least one
agency medical officer - a doctor, nurse, nurse practitioner or physician
assistant - who work on contract and are responsible for providing "adequate
medical care whenever necessary."

"At least one" could mean several, but grammatically the expression with this
modifier is still singular. So the relative pronoun "who," referring to "at
least one agency medical officer," is also singular and needs a singular verb.
(Even the phrase "more than one," which invariably indicates a plural sense, is
generally construed as singular: "There is more than one way to skin a cat," not
"there are more than one way.")

Omnipresence is for narcissists; far preferable is good judgment and a competent
team.

Even with the normal word order inverted, the compound subject "good judgment
and a competent team" is plural; make it "far preferable are ..."

Only illness, accident or profound bad luck are likely to prevent him from
winning the 101st Tour de France on Sunday.

Make it "is likely." Unlike a compound subject joined with "and," a compound
subject with "or" or "nor" is singular (unless the element of the subject
closest to the verb is itself plural).

Kill or be killed isn't the official tag line of "The Purge: Anarchy," but it
fits. It would also make a more suitable title for this satisfyingly creepy,
blunt, down-and-dirty thriller, one of those follow-ups that improves on the
original.

A perennial misstep. The antecedent of "that" is "follow-ups," not "one." So
"that" is plural and requires a plural verb: "those follow-ups that improve on
the original."

But the United States is one of the few advanced countries that spends less
educating the average poor child than the average rich one.

And again! We wanted "spend" to agree with the relative pronoun "that," which is
plural to agree with its antecedent "countries" (not "one").


 In a Word

This week's grab bag of grammar, style and other missteps, compiled with help
from colleagues and readers.

[Front page summary] If it seems like this trendy drink is ubiquitous, that's
because it is: Two companies have battled for market share, one corner store at
a time.

Don't use "like" as a conjunction introducing a clause. Make this "as if" or
"that" (or, in this case, simply omit it: "If it seems this trendy drink is
everywhere ...").

Every few minutes, she would tease out a tiny river shrimp that had become
stranded in the mud, and then dropping it into a bucket of water.

The parts joined by "and" are not parallel. Make it "and then drop it" or omit
the "and."

Following the terms of a plea agreement he accepted in April, Mr. Rapfogel paid
the remaining balance of $3 million he owed in restitution and was sentenced to
3 1/3 to 10 years in prison by Justice Larry Stephen of State Supreme Court.

Redundant. In this context, "balance" means "the amount remaining."

But on Tuesday night, his brother and chief adviser, Hashim Djojohadikusumo,
said Mr. Prabowo had not in fact withdrawn his candidacy, but was instead
demanding additional time for the elections commission to investigate "serious
problems" in both ballot casting and vote tabulations.

Two "buts" and an "instead" in close succession made for awkward reading.

[Picture caption] Mr. Garner's mother, Gwen Carr, and sister Ellisha Flagg mourn
on Saturday at the Rev. Al Sharpton's National Action Network's headquarters in
Harlem.

As The Times's stylebook says, we shouldn't use a present-tense verb in a
caption with a past time element. Make it "mourning" or "mourned."

This is true even after we adjusted the polls for anticipated partisan bias or
for having been conducted among registered, instead of likely, voters.
(Democrats typically fair better in polls of registered voters.)

Wrong homophone; it was changed to "fare" in time for print.

The recent revelations have created a crisis of faith in the federal agency,
prompting calls for an independent body to investigate such episodes in the
future, as well as for sweeping changes at the agency and to a sprawling web of
research labs that has grown after the 2001 terror attacks led to an intensified
focus on microbes that could be used as biological weapons.

The overstuffed sentence is awfully hard to read.

In the hours after the report that Mr. Walsh, a 2007 War College graduate, had
copied the work of others without attribution was posted on The New York Times
website, word traveled rapidly both online and in this small central
Pennsylvania town that has been the home of the institute since 1951.

In this construction, "the" goes with "website" and should be lowercase. Or use
the full name of the paper as a possessive, and uppercase "The": The New York
Times's website.

Although state officials won't say so publicly, it is clear that cost is a key
issue; The Wall Street Journal got ahold of emails that show Arkansas officials
"discussing Kalydeco's cost, and their worries about the expense of future
cystic fibrosis drugs."

No need for the colloquial "ahold." Make it "got hold of."

"Their big idea has been to sue me," the president said earlier this month,
unable to sustain a giggle. "That's what they're spending time on."

It seems as though we meant "suppress."

The starkly divergent scenes - of a political class in the capital struggling to
make the country whole, and militants taking every measure to carve it up -
presented a picture of a country in chaos just as President Obama is set to
weigh recommendations by the Pentagon for possible military action, which could
include airstrikes, either by drones or warplanes.

Six weeks after ISIS seized Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, there is a
growing sense that much of the country, even if it does not break into three
nations - a Kurdish state in the north, a largely Shiite area in the central
area and south and a Sunni state in the west - is likely to remain beyond the
control of a Baghdad government for some time.

The successive pairs of dashes are a warning sign that these two sentences are
overstuffed and almost unreadable.

Critics of the plan were quick to pounce, saying it appeared to redefine the
legal definition of a refugee and would only increase the flow of migration to
the United States.

"Redefine the definition" is redundant. We could say "change the definition" or
perhaps "redefine 'refugee.'"

"There are enough cases that it's not an isolated incident. It is a problem,"
said Michelle Lee, a spokeswoman for the F.B.I. in San Antonio.

Put the attribution after the first sentence.

[Picture caption] Father Jack Barker of St. Martha's Catholic Church in
Murrieta, Calif., spoke at a vigil.

"Father" is used in second reference to a priest, but not in the first, full
reference; make it "the Rev." Here's the stylebook entry:

Father (clerical title) is used in later references to Roman Catholic and
Orthodox priests, and to Episcopal priests who choose that style: The Rev.
Morgan J. Lamm; Father Lamm.

Filling that gap in our rock 'n' roll awareness is the mission behind the
gorgeously tuneful, new jukebox musical "Piece of My Heart: The Bert Berns
Story" - and if your first response to that title is "Bert who?," well, that's
exactly the point.

No comma is needed. Here's how the stylebook explains it:

Between adjectives in a series or a pair, use a comma if the adjectives convey
equal significance - that is, if they could comfortably be connected by and: a
tired, disillusioned politician; quick, easy solutions. But: a gray iron cot; a
wiry old carpenter (no comma because the phrases iron cot and old carpenter are
bound together more closely than the rest of each expression).

She showed a slide with 16 photos of moths, each more colorful and intricate
than the next.

The idiom calls for "each more colorful and intricate than the last" or "than
the one before." The idea is that the moths get more colorful, not less.

The hub will be as roomy as [#x200b]Grand Central Station[#x200b][#x200b] when
it opens next year to serve as a crossroads for countless workers and tourists,
coming and going.[#x200b][#x200b]

The famous building is "Grand Central Terminal" (because it's the end of the
train line). Use "station" only to refer to the subway station there.

"Moreover, Egypt, Turkey and Qatar all stand to benefit politically and in their
regional standing, but serving as power brokers to a cease-fire between Hamas
and Israel."

Mr. Kerry's visit here comes after a successful effort this to forge a
compromise in Afghanistan that led to an agreement to an international audit of
the ballots of a disputed election. ...

In addition, Hamas believes some of that assurances it received during the those
cease-fire talks were not kept, an American official said.

This obviously needed more careful attention. By later print editions, "but" in
the first sentence was corrected to "by"; in the second sentence, the stray
"this" was deleted; and "that" was changed to "the" in the third. In all
editions, however, "the" and "those" appeared back to back.

[Capsule summary] The protest reached a crescendo as more than 2,500 employees
and supporters rallied during the workday Friday outside of Market Basket's
headquarters in Tewksbury, Mass.

This is a very common misuse of "crescendo." The stylebook says this:

crescendo. A crescendo is not a peak of intensity but a gradual increase in
force, intensity or loudness. It is the trip to the peak.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


