                             2133 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                          September 3, 2014 Wednesday

Google's Anti-Aging Company Announces New Research Facility

BYLINE: CONOR DOUGHERTY

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 454 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â A Google-backed biotech company plans to build a new Bay Area-based
facility to research diseases that afflict the elderly, such as
neurodegeneration and cancer.


In the world according to Google, cars drive themselves, deliveries are dropped
off by drones and eyeglasses double as computers. Also, people live forever.

On Wednesday, Calico, a Google-backed biotech company run by the former
Genentech chief executive Arthur D. Levinson, said it would build a new Bay
Area-based facility that will research diseases that afflict the elderly, such
as neurodegeneration and cancer.

The facility, which doesn't have a precise location just yet, is being built in
partnership with AbbVie, a Chicago-area pharmaceutical company that has a
research facility in Redwood City, Calif., just a few miles from Google's
Mountain View headquarters. The companies will put up equal money - $500 million
at first, and up to $1.5 billion if things go well -  and split any profits down
the middle.

The partnership is a standard biotech deal in which, more or less, one company
deals with the early phases of drug development while the other takes
responsibility for testing and making whatever gets discovered. You could say
that Calico will look for drugs in test tubes and, if they're successful, AbbVie
will test them out and make them in factories.

"Calico will set up a world-class research and development facility in the San
Francisco Bay Area, where we will explore the basic biology of aging and develop
new medicines for patients with aging-related diseases," said Mr. Levinson,
Calico's chief executive, in a post on Google's social network, Google Plus.
"AbbVie will use its deep pharmaceutical expertise to provide scientific and
clinical development support and its commercial expertise to ensure these
therapies are widely available."

The deal brings some outside validation to Calico, which was formed a year ago
with Mr. Levinson as its sole employee. Google's chief executive,  Larry Page,
likened Calico to Google's other speculative projects - "moon shots," in Google
parlance.

"Don't be surprised if we invest in projects that seem strange or speculative
compared with our existing Internet businesses," he wrote on his Google Plus
page.

And while Google still won't say exactly how much money it's putting into
Calico, the deal  gives a more concrete view of how far the company is willing
to go, at least if the Calico contribution to this joint venture comes from
Google.

In an interview when Calico was announced, Mr. Levinson said the company's early
research might be done by giving money to academic scientists. Since then, Mr.
Levinson has announced several notable hires.

The AbbVie partnership seemingly makes it clear that Calico will be a drug
discovery and development company, which is what many observers expected based
on Mr. Levinson's background in drug development.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


