                             2152 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (ArtsBeat)

                            October 19, 2014 Sunday

'Homeland' Recap: Carrie Takes on the Men

BYLINE: JUDITH WARNER

SECTION: ARTS

LENGTH: 1128 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â And is Carrie channeling Hillary Clinton?


 Season 1, Episode 4, "Iron in the Fire"

The who's-up-who's-down of Carrie Mathison's relationship with the entire male
gender continues this week, as Quinn joins her team in Islamabad, Saul stirs the
pot with Pakistani intelligence, Fara proves her mettle as an on-the-ground
agent, Max shows his soft side, Ambassador Martha Boyd's husband (Mark Moses,
also known to viewers as Duck Phillips on "Mad Men") turns out to be a traitor,
and Aayan, expecting safe passage to London, instead finds himself caught in a
honey trap.

The score card ends up looking something like this:

Carrie vs. Saul: He's definitely on the upswing

Carrie may take a cutting tone at times when she talks to her former boss, but
he's still got all the juice - in this episode, the high-level connections, and
long-held favors due - that can permit him access to a very sinister top-level
general ("Call me Bunny," played by Art Malik) who mourns the end of the Cold
War and asserts that 9-11 was a hoax. Then, Saul talks to an extremely handsome
young man in Pakistani intelligence, who tells Saul a whole lot of nothing in a
terribly beautiful way. ("Answer me something if you would.")

Carrie vs. the men of the Islamabad station: They're up, she's down

Carrie's ostensible underlings have got her under surveillance, and though she
out-maneuvers them (to their grudging admiration), there's still some sort of
bigger trouble brewing. Deputy station chief John Redmond (Michael O'Keefe)
knows about her parallel operation, and wants to know if her team can be
co-opted:  "Think anybody in her detail will play ball with us?" And, while he
has provided some

important tips, identifying the ISI freelance operative Farhad Ghazi, and
filling her in on a secret way out of the building, eliciting his help is a
little like calling your cell phone carrier and requesting a less-ruinous plan:
you can't get any answers unless you guess the right questions.

"There's a tunnel," he says.

"Why didn't you say something?"

"You never asked."

Carrie vs. Quinn: Peter is holding his own

The power is shifting. First, there's the matter of those interminable searching
looks. The are-you-off-your-meds looks that do more to undermine Carrie's
authority than anything Redmond and Co. could ever imagine. Prime example: Did
you see the way a groggy Quinn, fresh off his flight from the United States and
not-yet caffeinated, snapped to attention when Fara intimated that Carrie wasn't
sleeping? (Redmond, too, took notice of her "vampire hours.") If Carrie's
illness comes roaring back, guess who'll be there to pick up the pieces. And
take charge.

Quinn's flat affect could actually be Carrie's undoing. What greater emotional
torture, after all, for an intensity addict, than his dull gaze and mechanical
speech? (Quinn's "Anything for you, Carrie" is, by now, completely unmoving.)

Consider how quickly her commanding, "Hey Quinn, can I talk to you for a
second?"  turned into an anxious game of are-you-mad-at-me?

"So, are we good?" Carrie asks.

"Yeah - we're good."

Now, I'm not saying that Quinn is being emotionally withholding for
manipulation's sake. He's clearly depressed: lying on the floor, in a quiet
moment, staring off into space; throwing a ball against the wall of his office
and catching it with the caged concentration of Steve McQueen's prisoner of war
Virgil Hilts in "The Great Escape."  But the upper hand is clearly there for the
grabbing.

Carrie vs. Aayan: I wish we didn't have to go there

It's just too distasteful. But we must, so let's do, as our friend in Pakistani
intelligence might say.

Aayan Ibrahim, the nephew of wanted terrorist Haissam Haqqani - whom, we learn
in this episode, the United States did not actually kill in the wedding bombing
- may or may not really be a virgin. He may or may not be at least a little bit
of a bad guy. He may or may not turn out to be playing Carrie.

But what is clear, in the scene when he lands in Carrie's safe house, and she
decides to put him at ease by making his bed and fondling his inseam, is that we
are meant to be getting a glimpse of girl-power run amok. Once again, as in the
sex scene with the clear-eyed building manager and the greatly impaired Quinn,
there's a camera angle that makes the woman in charge look extra large:  In this
case, Carrie's back and shoulders are made to seem wide (and in that black
cami-thingy, very, very white), while Aayan is crowded down to a small corner of
the frame. When she mounts him, it's the one moment in the entire episode where
she's indisputably on top.  And that's not a nice place to be.

Questions:

Is Carrie Mathison channeling Hillary Clinton?

Season Four's new opening credits include both sound and image of former
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who, one could argue, was the original Drone
Queen.

Clinton's line, "You can't keep snakes in your backyard and expect them only to
bite your neighbors," was delivered in Islamabad, in October 2011, just about a
month after an attack on the United States embassy in Kabul. Clinton was urging
the Pakistani government to more forcefully go after a terrorist group that, the
Obama administration asserted, was operating with the support of Pakistani
intelligence. The name of the group: Haqqani - just like Uncle Haissam. (More
thematic grist for the mill: during Clinton's visit, a group of female
protesters held up a banner that read "Listen Hellary Donot Behave Like a Boss."

Is something up with Fara?

It seemed puzzling to me that, after witnessing Aayan's meeting with his uncle,
Fara gave up the chase.

"I'm assuming you couldn't follow him," Carrie said.

"No, I'm on foot," Fara answered. How many times has Carrie raced out of
bazaars, cut her way through densely packed streets, and hopped into
conveniently placed cars? Couldn't Fara have made a call to Max? Given how
thorough we know she can be, her lack of tenacity made me wonder if she might
have another agenda.

And could there be a lamer, more prison-worthy wretch than the ambassador's
husband, Dennis Boyd, the professionally discredited political science
professor?

Boyd not only steals classified information from his wife's computer and hands
it over to a foreign intelligence service, he whines when he tells her he's
leaving Pakistan. ("I have spent my whole life following you around.") And he
baits his soon-to-be-abandoned wife by playing the bad-mommy card, invoking
their far-away son, Toby. ("He's away form home for the first time. One of us
should be there for him, don't you think?")

To top it off - I really don't think I imagined this - in the middle of his
scary confrontation with his new I.S.I. handler, Tasneen Kureshi (the wonderful
Nimrat Kaur), he steals a look at her cleavage. Oh, if only Martha had married
Saul.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


