                             2104 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                             July 3, 2014 Thursday

Today in Small Business: Saving the Naked Bean

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 591 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â BlaBlaCar. Extortion notices. What to do when co-workers fight. And
the economy adds 288,000 jobs.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

The economy added 288,000 jobs in June.

The economy added 281,000 private-sector jobs and 117,000 small-business jobs in
June, according to ADP.

The percentage of Americans who say their employers are hiring remains at a
six-year high, according to a new poll.

Janet L. Yellen indicates she won't raise rates to fight bubbles.

It's not just consumers getting pinched by higher prices.

Around the Country

A Shreveport, La., business owner fights to save a beloved cafe, the Naked Bean.

In Montana, the owner of a coffee kiosk pleads with her congressman to let her
keep her business.

A business owner in St. Louis goes to prison for stealing $350,000 from his
customers.

A Missouri business association is worried that a proposed Dollar General store
could hurt a quirky neighborhood of family-run businesses.

Around the World

A Greek business owners tries to survive both the recession and the government
bureaucracy.

In Europe, a start-up wants to connect millions of riders and drivers for trips
that average 200 miles.

Management

Here's how a business owner led his company out of deep trouble.

Businesses have been receiving a "notice of extortion" letters threatening
negative publicity, vandalism and harassment unless the target agrees to pay a
"tribute price" in Bitcoins.

Some businesses are surveilling themselves with drones.

Retail

Seattle's first retail marijuana store opens next week.

Target is asking customers to leave their firearms at home.

Cash Flow

Two successful small-business owners explain where they get their best "bang for
the buck."

Danny Meyer says rising rents are killing neighborhood restaurants.

Marketing

Tim Howard is now a marketer's dream.

Ninety-one percent of women feel misunderstood by advertisers, according to a
study.

Employees

Here's what to do when co-workers fight.

Customer Service

Here are 10 stories of "unforgettable" customer service.

Facebook is sorry that its emotions experiment was "poorly communicated."

Entrepreneurship

Many entrepreneurs are already getting ready for the Burning Man Festival.

This is the story of Ted Peckham, a young entrepreneur from the Midwest who, in
1935, came to New York and founded the Guide Escort Service, a way for women to
rent out men.

Larry Broughton says the skills veterans gain in the armed services make them
ideal team members and entrepreneurs.

Start-Up

Small, high-tech shrimp farmers are racing to meet the seemingly insatiable
demand.

Drowning in venture capital, mobile start-ups are waging unsustainable price
wars.

A company is making its check-printing software available to start-ups for free.

Social Media

Here's how to handle your social media after you're gone.

As anonymous social networks proliferate, they're increasingly turning to
location-based features as a way to keep users coming back.

Here are three ways to get your Facebook fans to subscribe to your email list.

Ideas

Why the music industry's next big disruption is in the recording studio.

Former Microsoft engineers create a social networking app for visual
storytelling.

Technology

Here are seven reasons to get a virtual phone number for your home business.

Microsoft Office for Android tablets is expected this year.

These printed circuits could connect any object for just a few cents.

Try this calendar app to keep your schedule straight.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


