                             2123 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                    (At War)

                           August 13, 2014 Wednesday

Williams Opposed War, but Supported the Troops

BYLINE: THOM SHANKER

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 829 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Robin Williams went above and beyond the thousands of miles he logged
in U.S.O. tours to bring a piece of home to soldiers.


Robin Williams opposed the war in Iraq. His many comedic riffs that punctured
the rationale for the 2003 invasion, and the president who ordered it, are
evidence enough.

Yet his affection for the warriors sent to carry out the nation's grim and
bloody business in Southwest Asia was on display each time he left home and
family at Christmas to go overseas and join the U.S.O. holiday tours for the
troops.

His successes on TV and on stage, in film and in stand-up clubs, have been amply
noted following his death on Monday. But his audiences, especially among the
troops, never knew how hard, really hard, Mr. Williams worked at his craft.

I observed his comedic diligence, genius and humanity up close during two of his
intense, raucous U.S.O. tours of Iraq and Afghanistan; in 2004 and again in
2010. (In all, he made four holiday barnstorming visits to the wars.)

Most of the comics, musicians, movie stars, athletes, cheerleaders and models
who cross the badlands of the combat zones with the U.S.O. understandably hang
out before each show in the climate-controlled tents that serve as a sort of
barren-desert green room for the talent and the traveling V.I.P.'s.

Not Mr. Williams.

Long before his stand-up set was scheduled, he would quietly wander the audience
starting with the very back rows, immediately recognizable, of course, and
always agreeable to posing for selfies and signing autographs.

Actually, though, he was on an intelligence-gathering mission.

He would engage in casual conversations, with jokes and impersonations and
heartfelt talk full of "Where ya' from?" and "How ya' doing?" and "Thanks for
what you do here."

But he was really working the crowd to pick up the flavor and the vibe - and
even the commanders' personalities and quirks - of every desert outpost to
produce a personalized routine for each location.

During one stop at a secret airfield in the Persian Gulf region - an air base so
highly classified that its location and mission were subject to a blackout
agreement imposed on all civilians aboard the U.S.O. tour - Mr. Williams brought
gasps and then cheers when, from the stage, he cracked wise about exactly what
they did there.

All you do is fly the world's most expensive model airplane, he said - in this
case, the Global Hawk, one of the prized intelligence drones just entering
top-secret service at the time.

The long voyages - U.S.O. tours can cover more than 20,000 miles by airliner,
cargo plane, helicopter and armored troop transport - gave Mr. Williams time to
engage in another hidden passion, reading. His kit bag was filled with books of
fiction and nonfiction, often history. All were source material for his routines
that skewered the world as we know it or as he saw it.

And he also devoured books on current affairs, about which he had a keen and sly
eye.

Reporters who travel on the U.S.O. holiday tours are not on assignment to write
theater reviews, of course. They use the trips - hosted by the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff - as an express bus into and around the war zones. This is
tradecraft: Arriving at a base with the nation's highest-ranking military
officer produces a local command staff amiable for interviews.

On one flight out of Afghanistan aboard a cavernous C-17 transport plane, Mr.
Williams saw two correspondents sitting in the hard-backed jump seats for
paratroopers that line both walls, pounding articles into their laptops after
analyzing unclassified military briefing slides of the war effort that had been
provided by the senior commander in Kabul just before takeoff.

Mr. Williams wandered over. He sat down, picked up the briefing slides and maps.
He paused before speaking.

Let me get this right, he said. We went into Afghanistan because Al Qaeda was in
Afghanistan. All right. Al Qaeda is no longer in Afghanistan. All right. Al
Qaeda is now over here in Pakistan. And we're still fighting over here in
Afghanistan?

No joke. His improvised analysis anticipated a heated policy debate about the
war back in Washington.

Mr. Williams would open every routine in the war zone with a battle cry of
"G-o-o-o-o-d morning, I-raq!" (or Af-ghanistan!), drawing on his portrayal of
Adrian Cronauer, the military D.J. who spoke to and for the American troops in
the film "Good Morning, Vietnam."

Rear Adm. Frank Thorp IV, now retired, worked with Mr. Williams while serving as
press adviser to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and, after leaving
active duty, during a tour as senior vice president at the U.S.O.

"No one was more supportive of the troops," Admiral Thorp said this week. "And
none of them knew that he was against the war. He was so very human and humble."

Admiral Thorp recalled that Mr. Williams would "politely, and quickly" end
conversations with senior generals when he saw young enlisted personnel coming
his way.

"He brought the love and laughter of home to our troops in such a difficult time
in their lives," Admiral Thorp said. "And he expected nothing back. "

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


