                             2258 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 10, 2014 Thursday 11:54 AM EST

Israel pounds Gaza for third straight day while Hamas fires rockets at Israeli
towns;
The death toll in Gaza jumped overnight, doubling to 78 dead and more than 500
injured, including a rising number of civilians.

BYLINE: William Booth;Ruth Eglash

LENGTH: 1323 words


GAZA CITY - Israel's major military operation against Hamas and other militant
groups in the Gaza Strip entered its third day Thursday, with a surge in deaths
in the territory, including nine Palestinians killed while watching a World Cup
game at a beach-front cafe.

The death toll in Gaza jumped overnight, doubling to 80 dead and more than 500
injured, according to the Gaza Health Ministry. The latest fatality was
5-year-old Abdullah Abu Gazal, who was killed in a midmorning Israeli airstrike
in Beit Lahia.

Israel pounded the coastal enclave with airstrikes Thursday aimed at Palestinian
operatives, launch sites and weapons caches, as well as, more controversially,
the homes of militant leaders there.

For its part, Hamas and other militant factions continued firing rockets
indiscriminately at Israeli population centers. Sirens sounded in towns and
cities across southern and central Israel on Thursday as dozens of rockets hit.
No deaths or injuries were reported.

Nine Palestinians were killed in a strike by an Israeli F-16 while they were
watching the World Cup semifinal match between Argentina and the Netherlands at
a cafe.

At the Fun Time Beach caf√©, a bulldozer sifted through debris Thursday morning
searching for the remains of a missing 10th person.

Hundreds of chanting mourners waving Fatah party banners attended a funeral and
burial Thursday morning for two brothers, Mohammed and Ibrahim Qannan, 24 and
26, who were killed late Wednesday while at the beach watching the soccer match
on television.

Mohammed al-Amoodi, a neighbor who gave the eulogy, said the two brothers were
not fighters but fishermen.

During graveside prayers, Amoodi told the mourners that the brothers died as
martyrs.  "The real revenge is by the rifle, by the rocket, by our strength, for
the sake of Allah," he said.

When he shouted, "our resistance is hitting Haifa and beyond!" - a reference to
the rocket fire from Gaza - the crowd responded, "thanks to God."

Another casualty in the enclave was a driver for the Gaza-based Media 24 news
organization, who was hit and killed while driving a vehicle with large "TV"
markings on the hood.

Since the operation began, Israel has struck more than 780 sites in Gaza and
carried out several targeted killings of militant operatives and commanders. The
group Islamic Jihad said three of its members were killed Thursday morning while
driving in the center of Gaza City.

According to Israel's home front authority, nine Israelis have suffered light
injuries, mostly while running for bomb shelters. Dozens have been treated for
anxiety and shock.

In response to the mounting casualty toll in Gaza, the Egyptian government
opened the Rafah land crossing between the strip and the Sinai Peninsula on
Thursday to let ambulances leave. Some Gazans with Egyptian relatives and
documents were also being allowed to leave the territory.

In Jerusalem, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu convened his security cabinet to
discuss the worsening situation, Israeli media reported.

Israeli aircraft are targeting houses in the Gaza Strip as never before, firing
precision-guided missiles into family living rooms.

Israeli defense officials say their mission is not only to stop Hamas and other
militant groups in the Gaza Strip from firing ever-more-powerful rockets deeper
into Israel, but also to weaken Hamas by killing its commanders.

But by targeting houses, Israel's risk of inflicting collateral damage has
soared.

Netanyahu said Wednesday Hamas was to blame, because it was "hiding behind
civilians."

Palestinian militants fired rockets that flew well beyond Tel Aviv, Israel's
commercial capital, landing in the country's coastal high-tech corridor.

The major Mediterranean port city of Haifa, about 100 miles north of the Gaza
border, ordered the opening of its public bomb shelters Wednesday after rockets
hit seaside towns to the south at Zichron Yaakov, Caesarea and Hadera. It was
the first time that rockets from Gaza had flown that far into Israel.

The Israeli military said a Hamas rocket that struck Hadera, about 70 miles
north of the Gaza border, was of the M-302 class, similar to ones found aboard a
freighter that Israel intercepted in the Red Sea in March. The ship was ferrying
a load of Iranian-supplied arms to Gaza, the Israelis said.

The group Human Rights Watch on Wednesday declared that because the Palestinian
rocket attacks on Israel are both indiscriminate and target civilian population
centers, they amount to war crimes. The group also said, "Israeli attacks
targeting homes may amount to prohibited collective punishment."

Israeli F-16 fighter jets, Apache attack helicopters and armed drones have hit
more than 500 targets in the Gaza Strip over the past two days.

Awad al-Nawasra was sleeping under a dusty orange tree during the long, hot
afternoon Wednesday when, he said, "I heard the voice of the rocket and then I
was floating."

When he awoke, the front of his two-story house had been torn away by an Israeli
airstrike. His 24-year-old son was dead alongside his wife. Buried in the rubble
were his two grandsons, ages 4 and 2.

Nawasra said he had nothing to do with Hamas or militants. He said his son was a
telephone technician.

Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas condemned the airstrikes on Gaza
and compared the Israeli operation to a form of "genocide."

"This war is not against Hamas or any faction, but against the Palestinian
people," Abbas said.

The Israelis say Hamas does not maintain traditional forces or military bases,
but hides its weapons caches and launchpads among the populace while its
commanders live at home with their families. The Israelis have killed at least
five known militants from the groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad.

"We use everything at hand to try to avoid and avert civilian casualties," said
an Israeli military spokesman, Lt. Col. Peter Lerner. "We phone up our enemies
and tell them that we are going to blow up the building, we throw non-explosive
munitions, and that is a sign they are supposed to vacate the building. Only
once we have seen them vacate the building - and we are talking about
command-and-control places and not the terrorists themselves - then we hit."

At least 300 people, more than half of them women and children, were injured
seriously enough to be taken to area hospitals in the past two days, said Gaza
Health Ministry spokesman Ashraf al-Qidra.

On Wednesday morning, two Israeli missiles struck the side yard of the home of
Zaher Hamdan, who was found an hour later slumped against a neighbor's wall in
the northern Gaza town of Beit Hanoun, sobbing and cursing the Israelis.

"The Israelis feed off blood," he said. "If they want to knock down my house,
knock it down! But they kill. They love killing."

Hamdan said he had nothing to do with Hamas or other militant groups. He said
there were no phone calls or warning rockets before the strike.

Hamdan's sister-in-law, Sahar al-Masri, 40, and her 14-year-old son, Ibrahim,
were sitting beneath a shade tree in the garden when two rockets struck. The
second one killed them both.

Two of Masri's daughters were wounded. One of the daughters, a toddler, was
vomiting and crying in the back of an ambulance at nearby Beit Hanoun Hospital,
her right leg and chest pocked by shrapnel wounds.

A surgeon at the hospital, Ayman Hamdan, said the young girl's mother and
brother died of massive bleeding. "They were dead when they arrived," the
physician said. "The rockets are designed to kill. They are very powerful, very
lethal."

The surgeon said his small hospital had treated nine patients seriously injured
by Israeli airstrikes in the past two days. Eight other patients either died in
surgery or arrived dead in the ambulance.

"We are not seeing wounded or dead fighters," he said. "Most of these people
look to me like civilians."

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

Eglash reported from Tel Aviv. Daniela Deane in Rome contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


