                             2262 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 11, 2014 Friday 11:39 AM EST

Rockets from both Gaza and Lebanon strike Israel;
Rockets fired from Lebanon strike in Israel's northern border area. Israel
responds with artillery fire.

BYLINE: William Booth;Ruth Eglash;Griff Witte

LENGTH: 1276 words


GAZA CITY - Rocket fire from both the Gaza Strip and Lebanon struck Israel
Friday morning as fears of a possible Israeli ground invasion rose in Gaza and
Israel warned some residents of the crowded coastal enclave to leave their
border-area homes.

A rocket from Hamas-controlled Gaza hit a gas station in the Israeli city of
Ashdod, seriously injuring one person and wounding two others, the Israeli
military said. Israel's air force said the site of the rocket launch was hit in
an airstrike soon afterward. Other rockets were intercepted by Israel's Iron
Dome defense system over Tel Aviv, Israel's commercial capital, the military
said.

Rockets fired from Lebanon struck in the northern border area Friday morning for
the first time since the current crisis began. Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, an Israeli
military spokesman, said Israel responded with artillery fire toward the
apparent source in southern Lebanon. There were no reports of injuries.

Southern Lebanon is a stronghold of the Shiite militant group Hezbollah, which
has fought Israel numerous times in the past, but past fire from Lebanon has
also been blamed on radical Palestinian factions.

It was not immediately clear which group fired on northern Israel.

The Israeli instructions to Gaza residents to leave the border areas in Gaza's
northeastern corner and stay away came as Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told
lawmakers that a cease-fire with Hamas, the Palestinian militant group that runs
Gaza, was "not even on the agenda." Netanyahu instead vowed to increase
airstrikes against Hamas until it stops firing rockets into Israel. In a
nationally televised address, he told Israelis to expect "further stages later
on."

An Israeli defense official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the
military envisions a limited incursion, although other options are under
consideration.

Israeli aircraft continued their assault on Gaza, bringing to about 1,000 the
number of targets struck so far in the four-day offensive. The Palestinian death
toll, which includes many civilians, women and children, stood at 98, according
to the Health Ministry in Gaza.

Israeli officials and residents of the country's south, many of whom have spent
hours in bomb shelters in recent days, pressed for tough measures against Hamas
to stop the rockets. Deputy Foreign Minister Zeev Elkin suggested cutting off
water and electricity to  Gaza's 1.7Â million people, according to Israeli media
reports.

"We have long days of fighting ahead of us," Defense Minister Moshe Yaalon said
Thursday.

President Obama called Netanyahu on Thursday and  "reiterated the United States'
strong condemnation of continuing rocket fire into Israel by Hamas and other
terrorist organizations in Gaza and reaffirmed Israel's right to defend itself
against these attacks," according to a White House statement. Obama also
expressed concern about the risk of further escalation and said all sides should
do all they can to protect civilians, the statement said.

There have been no deaths in Israel, where many Palestinian rockets have landed
in open areas or been intercepted by the country's missile defense system.
Israel's national emergency agency reported Thursday that 123 people have been
injured since hostilities began, a number that included more than 100 who were
treated for anxiety or shock.

The death toll in Gaza on Thursday included 22 children, 15 women and 12 elderly
people, and more than 500 people were injured, according to the Gaza Health
Ministry. It is not known how many of the dead in Gaza were militants. Hamas and
another militant group, Islamic Jihad, have confirmed only the names of 10
operatives killed.

Israeli leaders blame Hamas for the civilian deaths. Military leaders in Hamas
live alongside their families, and the group hides its weapons in neighborhoods
and launches rockets from back yards and agricultural fields.

In response to the mounting casualties in Gaza, the Egyptian government opened
the Rafah land crossing between the strip and the Sinai Peninsula on Thursday to
allow ambulances to leave Gaza. Some Gaza residents with Egyptian relatives and
documents were also being allowed to exit.

There were rising international calls Thursday for a cease-fire, including from
U.S. Secretary of State John F. Kerry.

Speaking in China, Kerry said he had contacted Netanyahu and Palestinian
Authority President Mahmoud Abbas, as well as other leaders in the region, to
discuss the possibility of a truce. An Egyptian-brokered cease-fire ended the
last major Israeli military offensive against Gaza in late 2012.

Lerner, the Israeli military spokesman, said the army has been building its
forces along the Gaza border for the past three days and is in "defensive mode."
But he added that the troops "are going through procedures to address a
potential ground force operation. The [Israeli military] does not want to go
there, but they will if they need to."

Shaul Bartal, a military analyst and retired major who served in various Israeli
military positions in the West Bank, said that what happens in the next few days
will determine whether the Israeli military launches a ground invasion. Israel
occupied Gaza for 38 years until 2005, when it withdrew its settlements and
soldiers.

"They have two options," Bartal said. "Go into Gaza but not enter the cities, or
to go deep inside, finish the job of the previous two [Israeli military]
operations in 2008 and 2012, and retake the Gaza Strip. But I do not think it is
in Israel's best interest to do that."

"I believe the army's goal is to kill the maximum number of Hamas members, so
they will learn their lesson and, in the end, give the Israeli people the
silence and security that they need," Bartal said.

Mustafa al-Sawwaf, a writer and analyst in Gaza with ties to Hamas, said the
group's military wing has been preparing for an Israeli ground invasion. He said
such an offensive would only unite Gazans.

"No one can stop the Israelis if they want to come," he said. "But I don't think
they will try to enter the cities. They might come in, a little bit, a
kilometer, just to show they can."

In the meantime, Israeli jets and drones have been carrying out the assault.
Early Thursday, an airstrike leveled a house in the teeming Gaza city of Khan
Younis. According to a neighbor, the Israeli military had telephoned the
intended target, a Hamas rocket engineer named Yassir al-Haj, and warned him
that his house was about to be destroyed.

But Haj was not at home. He dialed his sleeping family but could not rouse them,
according to the neighbor, and an Israeli missile killed seven family members.
They were buried side by side  Thursday afternoon.

"Why kill everyone in the house for just one guy?" said the neighbor, Fahad
al-Dali.

Nine Palestinians were killed in an airstrike late Wednesday while watching a
World Cup semifinal match at a cafe, relatives of the men said. Hundreds of
chanting mourners attended a funeral for two brothers, Mohammed and Ibrahim
Qannan, ages 24 and 26, who were killed while watching the soccer match.
Mohammed al-Amoodi, a neighbor who gave the eulogy, said that the two were not
fighters but fishermen and that they had died as martyrs.

"The real revenge is by the rifle, by the rocket, by our strength, for the sake
of Allah," he said.

"Our resistance is hitting Haifa and beyond," he shouted, referring to the
rocket fire from Gaza, which has penetrated farther into Israel - including
close to the northern city of Haifa - than ever before.

"Thanks to God!" the crowd responded.

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

griff.witte@washpost.com

Daniela Deane contributed to this report from Rome.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


