                             2283 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 20, 2014 Sunday 3:59 PM EST

Israel's Netanyahu: Blame for civilian deaths falls on Hamas;
Netanyahu spoke to ABC's George Stephanopoulos.

BYLINE: Philip Bump

LENGTH: 611 words


In an appearance by satellite on ABC's "This Week," Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu laid the blame for civilian deaths in the Gaza Strip "at
Hamas's door." Asked if Israel would pay a price in world opinion for those
deaths, Netanyahu responded that such a view ignored how the conflict started.
"They'll always look at the last reel of the movie."

"We regret any civilian deaths," Netanyahu told host George Stephanopoulos,
later adding that "all civilian deaths, as regrettable as they are, fall on
[Hamas's] shoulders." Hamas, he said, is "targeting civilians and hiding behind
civilians. That's a double war crime." The targeting of civilians referred to
the group's rocket attacks on Israel, 2,000 of which Netanyahu said had been
fired. Hamas hides behind civilians, he argued, because it "is very cynically
embedding its rocketeers, these tunnels, these terror tunnels in homes, in
hospitals, in schools. When we take action, as targeted as we can, they then use
their civilians as human shields." (On Fox News, U.S. Secretary of State John
Kerry appeared to be frustrated withÂ that targeting in comments captured by a
live microphone Sunday.)

When Netanyahu told Stephanopoulos that Israel provided warnings to civilians
(using air-dropped leaflets and text messages), the ABC host asked how they
could escape, given that Israel is "hitting from all sides." "They have paths to
leave," Netanyahu responded. "That's not an issue. They have plenty of exit
points. They know it. Hamas is saying, 'Don't use them.'" Because, he told
Stephanopoulos, Hamas wants to "have as many civilians killed on the Palestinian
side, because it gets you to ask me these questions."

Israel, he said, was willing to implement a cease fire. But the demands made by
Hamas before it would agree would be like "somebody bombarding 80 percent of the
American population and it comes out winning. ... Other terror groups will see
this type of terror behavior is rewarded."

Netanyahu also offered words of thanks to the United States. "I'm very grateful
for President Obama, the U.S. Congress and the American people for helping us
fund this missile defense," called Iron Dome. But "that is a temporary means."

"There is a problem in the Middle East," he said. "The problem is that we have
these mad Islamists. I say that the last thing we want to do is have them have
missiles, drones, chemical weapons, or in the case of Iran, nuclear weapons.
That would really change history."

In an interview with CNN's Wolf Blitzer that aired on "State of the Nation,"
Netanyahu explained how he saw the crisis ending: "Sustainable quiet." "I think
the important thing is to end the hostilities and then get into a situation
where we have a sustainable cease-fire," he said. "That means beginning to
discuss the demilitarization of Gaza. Gaza under all the previous agreements
should have been demilitarized. Instead of being demilitarized, it became an
Iranian-financed and -equipped fortress of terror. ... That has to stop. Those
tunnels have to be shut down." Netanyahu told Blitzer that the operation would
continue until those tunnels are closed, which, he said, would happen "fairly
quickly."

He also argued that Hamas was building those tunnels at the expense of Gaza's
citizens. "They've taken tens of thousands of tons of concrete that we enabled
them to bring into Gaza to build skyscrapers, to build schools, to build
hospitals. You know what they did with that, Wolf? They put 700 tons of concrete
into each one of these terror attack tunnels to penetrate Israel."

"I think many people in Gaza understand that Hamas is destroying Gaza,
destroying their lives," Netanyahu told Blitzer.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


