                             2222 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       June 24, 2014 Tuesday 12:11 PM EST

Obama should ignore the warriors and focus on the economy;
Obama should ignore the warriors and focus on the economy.

BYLINE: Katrina vanden Heuvel

LENGTH: 826 words


As Iraq blows up (again) and tensions rise in the Ukraine and in the South China
Sea, the United States'debate is focused on military intervention.
Neoconservatives, having learned nothing from the debacle they caused in Iraq,
indict the president for not intervening in Syria and for leaving Iraq. Liberal
interventionists, having learned nothing from the calamities now visited on
Libya, call for modulated bombing in both. The beleaguered administration sends
planes to the Baltic states and Poland, ships to Asia, token troops to Baghdad,
sustains hundreds of bases around the globe and is accused of withdrawing from
the world. Commentators fret over whether the war-weariness of the American
people will keep the "indispensable nation" from doing what must be done.

When you have a hammer, as the adage goes, everything looks like a nail. The
United States' hammer is the most sophisticated military in the world - and
nails appear in infinite variety across the globe.

Virtually absent from the debate is any awareness of how much the United States'
commitment to police the world detracts from dealing with the real security
needs of its people and the globe. Last week, Richard Trumka, president of the
AFLCIO, delivered a short address that reminded us of what is being lost in the
muscle flexing.

As Trumka noted, the world is still struggling to recover from the worst
economic crisis since the Great Depression. The European Central Bank just moved
to negative interest rates in a panic about deflation - falling prices from
failed demand - spreading across the continent. European austerity is condemning
a generation to unemployment and desperation.

In the United States, it has taken six years to recover the jobs lost in the
recession. Nearly 20 million people still can't find full-time work. Household
incomes are stagnating or declining for the typical family. Wages aren't keeping
up with the costs of necessities. The global economy works only for the few who
enjoy wealth beyond imagination but not for the many. The rules, as Elizabeth
Warren argues, are rigged.Â Trade and tax policy, monetary policy, fiscal
austerity and labor and employment laws have been rigged to keep wages down.

The result, Trumka argues, is an unstable and broken world economy in which
deflation or worse is always a threat and growth is seen only in financial
bubbles. Elites are prospering and assume they can carry on as before. Companies
stash profits abroad while pushing for a tax holiday. Meanwhile, catastrophic
climate change, already acknowledged even by the Pentagon as clear and growing
danger, goes virtually unaddressed as the world's attention is focused not on
the broken economy but only on the spread of violence and authoritarianism that
is, in large part, caused by the economic troubles.

President Obama is pilloried for sensibly trying to bring two wars to an end and
for being reluctant to enter new ones. But his real failure has been an
inability or unwillingness to lead a global New Deal, creating new rules for the
global economy, rules that would build shared prosperity and community rather
than Gilded Age inequality and plutocracy.

That would require global trade policies that protect workers' rights and the
environment and not just investors' rights. It would require ending severe trade
imbalances, in particular curbing the mercantilist practices of Germany and
China. It would require a commitment to full employment here, propelled by vital
public investments in areas vital to a decent society - from sewers and bridges
to schools and sustainable energy. It would require fueling the green industrial
revolution so that growth and jobs are sustainable.

In the Clinton years, then-U.S. ambassador to the United Nations Madeleine
Albright is reported to have challenged Colin Powell in a debate over whether to
bomb Syria: "What's the point of having this superb military you're always
talking about if we can't use it?" Armed with our hammer, able to hunt
terrorists with drones, track forces with satellites, tap phones across the
world, how can we avoid hitting all the nails we discover?

What we really need is to ignore the armchair warriors and the military lobbies.
Focus attention on a global economy that is fundamentally broken, on rules that
are badly rigged.  We need to be focused on building an economy of sustainable
and shared growth - not on policing a globe that will grow ever more unstable
and violent under current conditions.

Great nations don't decline because they forget what made them great. They die
because they continue to do what they did, ignoring the fact that the world has
changed. The "indispensable nation" crowd has it wrong. A powerful military
works best if it doesn't have to be used, allowing our leaders to focus on the
real threats to our security. And the military, for all its power, cannot
address the growing dangers posed by the broken global economy and catastrophic
climate change.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


