                             2277 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 17, 2014 Thursday 11:52 AM EST

Gaza residents scramble to make most of five-hour truce;
A senior military official suggested that an invasion of Gaza is near as Israel
announced it will briefly suspend attacks in what it calls a "humanitarian
truce."

BYLINE: William Booth;Sudarsan Raghavan;Ruth Eglash

LENGTH: 1695 words


GAZA CITY - Residents of the Gaza Strip rushed out of their homes Thursday
morning to take advantage of a five-hour "humanitarian truce" between the
Israeli military and Hamas militants, a respite that began just hours after
Israel bombed what it called a "terror tunnel" under the Gaza border, foiling a
potentially "devastating" attack by heavily armed infiltrators.

Until the last minute when the temporary cease-fire began at 10 a.m. local time,
the sides were still fighting, with Hamas firing rockets into southern Israel
and Israel launching airstrikes against the homes of at least three Hamas
political leaders.

In the early morning hours, a military spokesman said, the Israeli air force hit
the opening of an incursion tunnel used by Hamas militants to sneak under the
Gaza border fence for an attack inside Israel. The opening was about 250 yards
inside Israel and a little more than a mile away from a kibbutz, apparently the
intended target.

An infrared camera video clip released by the Israelis shows 13 men armed with
long weapons scurrying about and then entering a hole in the ground in the
middle of a field. Once they are all below ground, the screen fills with a flash
of light and a large cloud.

Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, a Israeli military spokesman, said at least one militant
was believed to have been killed in the strike and that the remaining fighters
apparently returned to Gaza through the tunnel. He said the attack "could have
had devastating consequences" and that the militants were armed with "extensive
weapons," including rocket-propelled grenades, the Associated Press reported.

Hamas's military wing claimed responsibility for the infiltration, asserting
that the airstrike came after the fighters completed their mission. Hamas denied
that any of the infiltrators were killed.

The military instructed the approximately 300 residents of Kibbutz Sufa to stay
in their homes around the time of the 4:30 a.m. airstrike, and there were no
reports from Israel that the infiltrators had succeeded in carrying out an
attack.

Israel and Hamas were searching for a way forward Thursday 10 days after the
current conflict began. A senior Israeli military official on Wednesday declared
that a ground invasion of Gaza was a "very high possibility."

Israel announced a unilateral "humanitarian truce" for five hours Thursday to
allow Gaza residents to stock up on food and other supplies and let aid reach
civilians. The pause in fighting was requested by the United Nations, Lerner
said.

In the early morning Thursday, Hamas said it would hold its fire. The Islamist
militant group rejected an earlier cease-fire proposed by Egypt, and a top Hamas
leader declared that the group is alone in the world as it battles Israel.

Just two hours after the five-hour truce began, it was violated by Gaza
militants who fired a salvo of mortar rounds into southern Israel. It was not
clear whether the mortars came from the Hamas military wing or one of the other,
smaller factions.

Still, there appeared to be some positive movement toward a more permanent
cease-fire.

An Israeli delegation arrived in Cairo to discuss a truce deal. The group
includes the director of the Israel's domestic security services, known as Shin
Bet; a special envoy of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu; and the head of the
Defense Ministry's political-security department, according to Israeli news
media.

Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas on Wednesday evening met in Cairo
with Mousa Abu Marzook, the head of the Hamas political bureau, the Palestinian
Maan news agency reported. Abbas is scheduled to visit Egyptian President Abdel
Fatah al-Sissi on Thursday.

Hamas continued to shower rockets Wednesday into southern and central Israel,
including Tel Aviv, underscoring the extent to which the militants believe they
still have the military capability to persuade Israel to accept their terms,
analysts said.

"From their rationale, they are holding strong, as if they have nothing to
lose," said Miri Eisen, a former Israeli army intelligence official. She added,
"If they feel they have nothing to lose, they can continue this for a long
time."

That attitude is increasing pressure on Israel. Hundreds of Israeli airstrikes
have killed more than 200 Palestinians but have done little to stop Hamas
rockets from striking Israeli towns. Human rights activists are accusing Israel
of killing innocent civilians and possibly committing war crimes. Egypt, once a
reliable ally, no longer seems to have the negotiating clout it once had.

All this is generating discussions - within Israeli political and military
circles and on television, radio and editorial pages - of a possible ground
invasion of Gaza in the coming days. In Tel Aviv, a high-ranking Israeli
military official told reporters Wednesday that there was "a very high
possibility" of such an operation, adding, "If you want to efficiently fight
terrorism, you need to have boots on the ground."

More than 113 rockets were fired from Gaza into Israel on Wednesday, according
to the Israeli military.

By Wednesday night, 222 people had been killed in Gaza during the nine-day
operation, including 49 minors and 24 women, according to the Gaza Health
Ministry. More than 1,600 people have been wounded in Gaza, the officials said.

Among the latest casualties were four Palestinian children, all younger than 12,
who were killed by an Israeli missile or shell while playing on a beach in Gaza
near a hotel used by foreign journalists, according to witnesses and Palestinian
officials. The four boys were cousins. Seven others - adults and children - were
reported wounded in the strike.

The Israeli army, calling the incident tragic, said the target had been a Hamas
operative.

President Obama addressed the situation in brief White House remarks. Although
he did not specifically mention the beach deaths, he said, "We are all
heartbroken by the violence . . . especially the death and injury of so many
innocent civilians in Gaza." Obama said the United States would continue to "use
all our diplomatic resources and relationships" to bring about a lasting
cease-fire. "In the meantime," he said, "we are going to support efforts to
protect civilians in Israel and Gaza."

For the first time in the conflict, Israel on Wednesday used its airstrikes to
target the homes of top Hamas political leaders. They included Mahmoud Zahar, a
founder of Hamas who played a prominent role in the Islamist militant group's
2007 takeover of Gaza.

The strike on Zahar's four-story house toppled its facade into the garden. Zahar
was nowhere to be found Wednesday; he fled before the Israeli operation began
and is assumed to be in hiding.

A neighbor, Ahmed al-Jarosha, said: "We knew when the cease-fire was rejected
that we would start to see the Israelis hit political leaders. It is no
surprise."

The homes of three other Hamas leaders who are also members of the Palestinian
Legislative Council were hit by airstrikes early Wednesday. None of politicians
was injured.

In another possible signal of its intentions, Israel urged tens of thousands of
Palestinians in Gaza to evacuate border areas.

Hamas leaders called for Gazans to remain in their homes. The militants did not
stop evacuees from leaving but did not assist them. Hamas doctrine holds that
those who abandon a neighborhood are following the orders of the occupiers.

"What is the real problem? Hamas asking people to stay in their own homes? Or
the Israelis threatening their lives if they stay in their homes?" said Mushir
al-Masri, a Hamas political leader.

Israelis condemn the practice as a cynical use of human shields. Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has said, "We are using missile defense to protect
our civilians, and they're using their civilians to protect their missiles."

Israel came under sharp criticism Wednesday for its tactics. The watchdog group
Human Rights Watch said Israeli air attacks in Gaza were targeting civilian
structures and killing civilians, acts that could constitute war crimes. Israel
has denied such allegations.

Hamas and other Palestinian militants boast that if there is a ground invasion
of Gaza, they would use it as an opportunity to prove their mettle, saying that
Israeli airstrikes would cease during the invasion and Israeli soldiers would be
vulnerable to attack.

"It is best when the Israeli soldiers come to us," said Abu Ahmed, chief
spokesman for the militant group Islamic Jihad, whose rocket arsenal and numbers
of fighters in Gaza are second only to Hamas.

"We know the terrain. It is our land," he said.

Others in Gaza warn that a ground incursion by Israel would create a
humanitarian crisis and a potential bloodbath. "It would be a catastrophe," said
Mkhaimar Abusada, a political scientist at Al-Azhar University in Gaza.

Hamas has struggled as a government to deliver a better life for the people of
Gaza. Its military wing has achieved some success in the current conflict: Its
rockets reached farther than before, causing air sirens to sound repeatedly over
Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, and Hamas managed to penetrate Israeli airspace with a
drone.

"But Hamas today as a military doesn't have much beyond rockets, and the arsenal
is not renewable" because the smuggling tunnels from Egypt are closed and Israel
does not allow Gaza to have a seaport or airport, said Ibrahim Ibrash, a former
culture minister in Gaza.

Hamas also finds itself more isolated than ever. Standing in front of the Shifa
Medical Center, Gaza's largest hospital, Hamas spokesman Sami Abu Zuhri
complained that Gaza and Hamas have been abandoned even by their brothers. "The
Arab world has done nothing. The Arab world is silent about Gaza."

Hamas leaders now openly heap scorn on Egypt's new government, headed by Sissi,
and complain that Cairo is working closely with the Israelis to crush the
Islamist movement. "The Egypt media attacks Gaza. Shame on you. The Arab
position is shameful," Abu Zuhri said.

sudarsan.raghavan@washpost.com

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

Raghavan reported from Jerusalem and Eglash reported from Tel Aviv. Karen
DeYoung in Washington and Islam Abdel Karim in Gaza City contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


