                              22 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 16, 2014 Thursday 10:25 PM EST

Five myths about Obama's drone war

BYLINE: Mark R. Jacobson

LENGTH: 1062 words


1Drones are immoral.

Drones are neither autonomous killer robots nor sentient beings making
life-or-death decisions. Yet, with the "Terminator"-like connotations of the
term, it is easy to forget that these vehicles are flown via remote control by
some 1,300 Air Force pilots. Drones are an evolution in military technology, not
a revolution in warfare.

From a moral and ethical standpoint, drones are little different from rifles,
bombers or tanks. Decisions about how and when to use them are made by people.
No doubt, the distance between the human warfighter and the battlefield has
never been longer, but the psychological proximity can be closer for drone
pilots than for other military personnel. Intense surveillance makes these
pilots so familiar with their targets - when they sleep, eat and see their
families - that some have reported difficulty reconciling that intimacy after
they've pulled the trigger.

The toughest moral question is not about technology but about targeting and
transparency: When militants plotting against America operate globally, don't
wear uniforms and may even be U.S. citizens, who can be targeted and where? The
White House recently released to members of Congress  a Justice Department memo
providing details of the targeting process - this may alleviate, but not
eliminate, those concerns.

2Drone strikes cause inordinate civilian casualties.

Armed drones are some of the most precise weapons used in conflict; we hit what
we aim for. But any lethal force results in some civilian casualties, and the
use of drones beyond "hot battlefields" means that the civilian-combatant
distinction is harder to make.

The New York Times has reported that the Obama administration counts all
military-age males in a strike zone as combatants - an approach that would
underreport civilian casualties. But the New America Foundation's Peter Bergen
argues that, since 2008, the civilian casualty rate from drones has declined
dramatically and as of last summer was  "at or close to zero."

While many dispute this figure, civilian casualties in drone strikes are clearly
fewer than if massive bombs were used instead.

Armed drones can strike fear in the hearts of America's adversaries and provide
a military edge. But Washington may have to deal with blowback. John Bellinger,
a former State Department legal adviser in the George W. Bush administration,
worries that drones might "become as internationally maligned as Guantanamo."
Retired Gen. Stanley McChrystal has said that U.S. drone strikes are "hated on a
visceral level."

If drones are perceived as unjust, or if the deaths of innocents are attributed
to them, correctly or not, America's larger strategic objective - defeating
al-Qaeda and the ideology that feeds it - could be at risk.

3Drones allow us to fight wars without danger.

The allure is simple: A drone swoops in while its operator is safe, thousands of
miles away, and the precision-guided ordnance hits a target, with little risk to
our troops.

But drones should not give us a false sense of security. After all, the
intelligence required for targeting may require U.S. boots on the ground. And
drone attacks will not improve governance in a nation that offers a haven to
terrorists.

Yes, drones can attack a target accurately, quickly and stealthily while
reducing the danger to the pilot. But they cannot train foreign troops, engage
with tribal leaders or strengthen local governments - the centers of gravity in
most U.S. conflicts today. The exaggerated promise of drones risks substituting
targeting for strategy.

4Drones are technologically complex weapons that only rich nations can afford.

Armed drones are neither as simple as model airplanes nor as complex as
high-performance fighter jets. Of course, a remote-controlled helicopter that
you can build in your garage is certainly not as capable as the $26.8Â million
MQ-9 Reaper, the primary U.S. hunter-killer drone. But drones are much less
expensive than fighter aircraft, and in an age of increasing austerity, it is
tempting for nations to consider replacing jet fleets with armed drones.

More than 50 countries operate surveillance drones, and armed drones will
quickly become standard in military arsenals. The challenge is to consider what
international rules, if any, should govern the use of armed drones. The United
States is setting the precedent; our approach may define the global rules of
engagement. Of course, we cannot expect other nations to adopt the oversight and
restrictions we have. What doors are we opening for other nations' use of drones
? What happens when terrorist groups acquire them? The United States must
prepare for being the prey, not just the predator.

5Obama will be remembered as the drone president.

The attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq compelled
the United States to boost the speed and accuracy with which it targets
terrorists. But it was not until the Obama administration that U.S. technology
and intelligence caught up with the need to take down terrorist networks rather
than just individual leaders. As a result, there have been three to six times
more drone strikes under Obama than under Bush.

While the use of drone warfare has come of age under Obama, whether he comes to
be defined by this weapon is very much a political question. The tool kit of the
war on terror includes far more than armed drones, but for a modern president,
perception is reality. Drone strikes generate enormous controversy. For some,
even the nomination of John Brennan - the public face of the administration's
drone program - to run the CIA indicates the centrality of drones to an "Obama
Doctrine."

In his Senate confirmation hearing Thursday, Brennan emphasized his commitment
to Congress's oversight of overt and covert programs. It will remain critical
for him and the White House to continue to articulate their overall approach to
combating terrorism, making the case that drones are part of the strategy, not a
substitute for it.

mjacobson@gmfus.org

Read more from Outlook:

President Obama: Did or did you not kill Anwar al-Awlaki?

Five myths about the immigration 'line'

Five myths about the bin Laden raid

Five myths about Obama's foreign policy

Friend us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


