                             224 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            August 28, 2014 Thursday

Google Joins Amazon in Dreams of Drone Delivery

BYLINE: CONOR DOUGHERTY

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 327 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Who needs UPS trucks and bicycle delivery when you can fly in things
people buy online?


Amazon, it seems, is not the only big technology company dreaming of a drone
delivery service.

After two years of stealth research, Google on Thursday lifted the veil on an
experimental program to deliver goods with tiny unmanned, or "drone," aircraft
that are a cross between a plane and a helicopter, according to Google. The
project was detailed in a lengthy Atlantic story.

If the idea sounds familiar, that's because online retailer Amazon announced an
experimental program last year that would also deliver goods through the air.

The program, which Google is calling "Project Wing," was led for two years by
Nicholas Roy, an M.I.T. professor who took a sabbatical for the project.
According to The Atlantic, Google now has dozens of people on Project Wing.
They're working on improving the technology, and may create a drone delivery
app.

The Internet giant is also aggressively working on other kinds of robotics, most
notably self-driving cars.

The Federal Aviation Administration has so far not been keen on the drone
delivery concept. Earlier this year, it blocked an aerial delivery service
proposed by a local brewery in Minnesota for ferrying beer to ice fishermen who
didn't want to come in from the cold.

A Google spokeswoman said the company has briefed the F.A.A. on its hopes for a
fleet of baby helicopters, which would not be built for at least a few years.

In terms of how the actual delivery would be handled, Google said it tried the
parachute approach (like in The Hunger Games), as well as shooting the package
downward like a missile. They also tried landing it, but that was problematic
because Google believed people might get too close to the vehicle and lose a
finger to the drone's rotors while trying to fetch their delivery.

In the end, they settled on a kind of fishing line that lowers the payload to
customers from an airborne drone about 150 feet above the ground, as Google
demonstrates with a package of dog food in this video.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


