                             2347 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                      August 12, 2014 Tuesday 6:12 PM EST

We'd better wake up to the threat of Western jihadists in Syria;
We'd better wake up to the threat of Western jihadists in Syria before they
return home.

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 310 words


Jihadist terrorists in Syria are not staying put. As Hillary Clinton pointed
out, they've poured into Iraq. We've already seen video of one American
jihadist, and there may be dozens more from the United States and Europe who
have flocked there. Alert lawmakers rightly are concerned that these jihadists
will soon be flying hither and yon, bringing terror with them.

Back in March, retiring Rep. Frank Wolf (R-Va.) introduced a bill to address
this problem. A press release announced:

The International Conflicts of Concern Act would give the president authority to
restrict travel and material support to countries like Syria, where foreign
terrorist organizations are active in fighting and may be working with
government or anti-government forces.

This is one more legacy of President Obama's refusal to act in Syria. Now that
the threat is unmistakable maybe it would be a good time to start doing
something about jihadist who may return to the homeland. Earlier this summer FBI
Director James Comey visited Miami. The Miami Herald reported at the time that
the FBI's focusÂ "has shifted toward U.S. travelers going to Syria bent on some
'misguided jihad' - including a Florida man who participated in a rebel
suicide-bombing attack in May." The report continued:

The 22-year-old Vero Beach man, Moner Mohammad Abusalha, was believed to have
been the first American suicide bomber in Syria.

This surely should be at the top of the to-do list when Congress returns. Oh,
and does anyone think it is a good idea to forswear using drones to knock out
terrorists before they get on planes to carry out plots? Well, other than Sen.
Rand Paul (R-Ky.), I mean.

The lackadaisical attitude toward the growing jihadist threat is reminiscent of
the pre-9/11 days. But now, after two 9/11 attacks and nearly 13 years since the
first one, there is no excuse for unpreparedness.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


