                             2344 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 11, 2014 Monday 3:31 PM EST

New video of U.S. operations in Iraq released in waves

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 356 words


The political crisis in Iraq grew on Monday, as the country's president moved to
push controversial incumbent Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki out of office by
naming Shiite politician Haider al-Abadi as his successor. Maliki seems
unwilling to go, considering Iraqi Special Operations teams and tanks surrounded
Baghdad's Green Zone and were said to be receiving orders directly from Maliki.

Amid all this, the United States continued to carry out both airstrikes and air
drops over the weekend. The latest strikes acknowledged came Sunday afternoon,
when U.S. fighter aircraft destroyed several vehicles in a militant convoy
moving to attack pesh merga troops, who defend Iraq's northern Kurdish region.

Officials with U.S. Central Command, which oversees military operations in the
Middle East, said Monday that the Islamic State convoy was moving to attack
troops defending Irbil, the city in northern Iraq that the Obama administration
wants to protect because of the presence of a U.S. consulate and military
advisers.

That's on top of a previous round of airstrikes on Sunday morningÂ by fighter
jets and armed drone aircraft, U.S. military officials said. In the first of
those cases, U.S. aircraft hit an Islamic State armed truck about 2:15 a.m. that
was firing on Kurdish troops on the outskirts of Irbil. Afterward, the U.S.
military saw a second armed militant truck moving away from the area, and struck
it, too, around 2:45 a.m.

Additional strikes occurred at 3:40 a.m., 5:45 a.m. and 7:25 a.m., CENTCOM
officials said. In the first, U.S. aircraft destroyed a militant mortar position
and damaged a nearby militant truck. Armed vehicles were hit again the following
two strikes, U.S. officials said.

The information released wasn't quite as detailed as that released by the
Pentagon on Friday during the first round of strikes. In those cases, U.S.
officials quickly discussed the kind of jets used (F/A-18F fighters) and where
they are based (the USS George H.W. Bush aircraft carrier in the Persian Gulf).

Here are examples to come out over the last 48 hours, all posted to CENTCOM's
YouTube page:



LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


