                             2322 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 5, 2014 Tuesday 7:24 PM EST

Is there ever any merit to video games about real-life war zones?

BYLINE: Caitlin Dewey

LENGTH: 1053 words


On Monday, Twitter-pundits spotted a pair of smartphone games so repugnant, so
offensive, so utterly, dreadfully gross - that their uproar got the games pulled
from Google's app store within the span of an afternoon.

One game, Bomb Gaza, lets you play as an Israeli jet pilot, dropping bombs on
Hamas operatives and civilians. (You lose when too many civilians die.)

The other, Gaza Assault: Code Red, involves steering an unmanned Israeli drone
over a city and deploying "powerful weapons" to take out "terrorism" and
"missile threats."

Neither of the apps exist any longer, thanks to their hasty removal from the app
store; Google representatives told multiple media outlets only that they remove
apps that "violate our policies." But oddly, lots of other games about the Gaza
conflict, most of them uploaded within the past two weeks, remain.

There's Defending Israel: Southern Escalation, which involves intercepting
Kassam and Grad targets to "minimize civilian casualties."

There's Iron Dome: Rocket Destroyer, which appears to include real photos from
the ground.

There's even Iron Dome: The Game, released July 22, which involves firing
missiles at caricature-like terrorists as they "infiltrate the city and explode
their-selves (sic) in the name of their god."

And further afield, many miles from Gaza, other wildly popular "military
shooters" - like Medal of Honor, Kuma\War and Call of Duty: Modern Warfare -
essentially "gamify" real conflict situations in which real people, many of them
civilians, died. And with more than 100 million copies sold of the Call of Duty
franchise alone, conflict games aren't in any way a fringe or niche phenomenon.
Many conflict games are viewed more times than conflict movies. This is the
primary medium in which many people consume commentary and context about war.

This is not, to be clear, a commentary on the offensiveness or the
inoffensiveness of conflict-based video games, which is already a subject of
debate all over the Internet/academic literature. Nor is it in any way a comment
on the severity or morality of the war in Gaza relative other conflicts. But
there is a glaring disparity here, and one that deserves examining: Why did Bomb
Gaza and Gaza Assault cross some inviolable line of public opinion ... and every
other game did not?

Unsurprisingly, the issue seems to be have many aspects. Much of the reason lies
with the games themselves, which are arguably more reductionist, and thus more
offensive, than their Xbox and desktop predecessors. (The patriotically phrased
"Call of Duty" is one thing - the blunt, inflammatory "Bomb Gaza," which has no
nuance or narrative arc, is another.)

Much of the outrage also comes from the nature, and the proximity, of the Gaza
conflict. Whereas games like Delta Force: Blackhawk Down came out years after
the conflict they describe, and games like Modern Warfare describe a conflict in
the ambiguous immediate-future, Gaza is going on ... right now. Israel and Hamas
have only just begun a delicate, drawn-breath ceasefire. And in the U.S., at
least, public opinion on the morality of the Gaza conflict is far more divided
than the morality of, say, capturing Osama bin Laden: according to one CNN poll,
57 percent of Americans think Israel's incursion in Gaza was justified, versus a
third who think it was not.

But to a certain extent, none of that's relevant. If you read through some of
the tweets on Bomb Gaza and Gaza Assault, you'll see another type of moral
panic, too - one that long predates the specific circumstances of these specific
games. It's the knee-jerk (and totally viable!) opinion that "war" and "game"
should repel each other, like two poles on a magnet. When the Japanese
game-maker Konami cancelled the military shooter "Six Days in Fallujah" in 2009,
an executive working on the game explained the controversy this way to the New
York Times: "the stereotypes that are associated with the word 'game' and the
incompatibility of that with the word 'Iraq.'"

The researcher Marcus Schulzke would disagree. Writing on the academic Web site
E-IR earlier this week, Schulzke argued - convincingly - that video games that
"simulate international conflict" fill an important narrative function. Because
games allow individuals a different venue to grapple with current events,
Schulzke writes, they enable gamers to better reconstruct and understand those
events - as well as "the efficacy of military force, and the moral boundaries of
warfare." He writes:

Even games that seem to glorify war or that are used as tools of strategic
communication frequently contain critical themes, though they are usually subtle
... The presence of critical themes and opportunities for critical interventions
in games makes it important to avoid reductionist analyses of games that focus
entirely on how they distort real events or glorify war.

Schulzke cites games like Spec Ops: The Line, which include important, implicit
criticisms of war - in that game, players can accidentally kill civilians or
develop PTSD. The Times also reported in 2010 on a survey out of the University
of Pennsylvania that suggested games might emotionally engage players in the
process and pain of war; one respondent purportedly said Medal of Honor and Call
of Duty deepened his "respect for those who have died."

It's unlikely, of course, that a game with a title as insensitive as "Bomb Gaza"
would have had of these enviable effects. But nonetheless, we shouldn't assume
that all games about Gaza are inherently repugnant, or offensive, or worthy of
deletion - and neither should Google.

After all, video games are ultimately just another form of media. And like any
other media, they can be a force for good: One game called "PeaceMaker,"Â created
by game developers at Carnegie Mellon in 2007, famously attempted to humanize
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

"There is nothing more challenging than expressing empathy for the other side,
especially when your side is under attack," one of PeaceMaker's consultants, Asi
Burak, recently wrote in Kotaku. One of PeaceMaker's objectives was to encourage
that kind of empathy - to help players see the political needs, and the pain, of
both sides.

The situation in Gaza has arguably gotten more complicated since then; but maybe
a certain kind of game, in a certain small way, could still help.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


