                             2371 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     August 20, 2014 Wednesday 9:29 PM EST

U.S. military announces 14 airstrikes in Iraq following James Foley execution

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 475 words


Militants who executed American journalist James Foley in a video released
Tuesday implied they would do the same to another war correspondent, Steven
Sotloff, if President Obama does not stop U.S. airstrikes in Iraq. That doesn't
appear to have dissuaded the president or senior defense officials: The U.S.
military announced 14 more airstrikes in northern Iraq on Wednesday, saying it
had hit a variety of militant targets.

The strikes, conducted in support of Iraqi security force operations, were
carried out by a mix of fighter jets, drones and "attack aircraft," according to
U.S. Central Command. Defense officials did not specify which kind of aircraft
were used, and have said that they will not do so because countries from which
they might be flying are sensitive to appearing involved. One possibility is an
armed KC-130 plane, which is equipped with Hellfire missiles and other weapons.
At least one from the 22nd Marine Expeditionary Unit, of Camp Lejeune, N.C., is
in the region.

The strikes destroyed or damaged six militant Humvees, three improvised
explosive device emplacements, one mortar tube and two armed trucks, CENTCOM
officials said. The strikes occurred around the Mosul Dam, which U.S. officials
say Iraqi troops seized from the militants in recent days. Since Obama first
authorized airstrikes Aug. 7, the United States has now conducted a total of 84
airstrikes across Iraq, including 51 near the dam.

The continuing of the airstrikes mirrors comments Obama made Wednesday in
addressing the death of Foley. The United States will be "relentless" against
Islamic State militants, the president said. AskedÂ whether the United States
might consider suspending its airstrikes, one U.S. official told The Washington
Post the "only question is if we do more."

The militants still control a wide swath of territory across northern and
western Iraq as well as territory in Syria. Secretary of State John F. Kerry
underscored Obama's comments in a statement and a series of tweets Wednesday
afternoon, saying the Islamic State "must be destroyed" after the United State
confirmed the video of Foley's death was legitimate.

Kerry used a related name for the organization, the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant, or ISIL:

Jim Foley went to the darkest of places to shine the light of truth/he was brave
and bold/no masked coward can ever steal his legacy

His family is incredible/we've all been touched by their fight for Jim. - John
Kerry (@JohnKerry) August 20, 2014

There is evil in this world. ISIL = ugly, savage, inexplicable, nihilistic,
valueless evil.

ISIL must be destroyed/will be crushed. - John Kerry (@JohnKerry) August 20,
2014

Related on Checkpoint: Steven Sotloff, journalist held captive by the Islamic
State, went missing in Syria

#ISISMediaBlackout goes viral following purported execution of James Foley

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


