                             2327 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 7, 2014 Thursday 3:50 PM EST

Is U.S. obligated to provide free electricity to Afghanistan?

BYLINE: Eugene Kontorovich

LENGTH: 739 words


The U.S. occupied Afghanistan for perhaps a decade, continues to maintain a
troop presence there, and retains significant "administrative powers," like
killing people in drone strikes.

Yet no one thinks that this entails an obligation for the U.S. to provide
electricity to Afghanistan, even during the occupation. Indeed, only 30% of
Afghanistan's population currently has access to electricity, so if there is
such a duty, the U.S. is massively remiss.

And soon it is going to be less, as the U.S. does to Afghanistan what Israel
supposedly cannot do to Gaza - cut off the free electricity they had been
supplying:

When the United States stops funding power generation in Afghanistan's southern
city of Kandahar next year, the lights are set to go out and factories will fall
idle, playing into the hands of Taliban insurgents active in the area. ... But
regular power in the city is still years away, and when the United States
finally ends subsidies - currently running at just over $1 million a month - in
September 2015, Kandahar could lose around half its severely limited electricity
supplies, Afghan power officials and U.S. inspectors say.

It is unlikely that America's turning off the lights in Afghanistan will be
denounced as a international crime by anyone, let alone the group of Israeli law
professors has argued that Israel is obligated to provide free electricity to
Gaza, despite hostilities. The professors wrote in response to a legal opinion
from Prof. Avi Bell arguing the contrary.

I already recounted some problems with this view. Now let me continue. The
professors did not, as far as I understand their memo, suggest that providing
power to a hostile belligerent was a general rule of international law, but
rather based on some special relationship between Israel and Gaza. Some
combination of Israel's occupation of Gaza and its current partial blockade
require it to assume special duties to the territory, they claim. The blockade
argument is really just a disguised objection to the legality of the blockade;
in a proper blockade, one need not provide electricity.

The group opinion, unlike Bell's, cites absolutely no state practice in support
of its positions. The rule they describe is not contained in any treaty, nor has
it ever been applied to any state. Moreover, it dismisses the examples of
contrary state practice cited by Bell, by saying thatÂ "nothing can be concluded"
from it because "international law is in constant development."

They are saying Israel would be violating a rule that has not yet formed. They
tacitly acknowledge the lack of a concrete prohibition elsewhere, by saying that
one must find an obligation for Israel to provide electricity because otherwise
there would be a "legal black hole," where no rule of international law applies.
This is hardly a problem unless one assumes, contrary to the Lotus principle,
that international law has a rule for everything.

Another strange source of international law they cite is whether an
"international body of import" would "view it favorably." I do not know what a
"body of import" is, and whether it includes such as eminences as the UNHRC.
However, it is clear that the potential future view of a theoretical
international body is not a source for determining international law. Past
decisions of such bodies can be evidence of international law, but unlike
domestic systems, the job of the international lawyer is not to "predict" how a
"body," which may or may not have jurisdiction, would view the matter.

It is worth noting that, unlike food, water and other essentials, access to
electricity is not identified as a basic human right in any treaty; indeed, it
was, to the consternation of some, omitted from United Nation's Millennium
Development Goals (H/T Irene Kelly).

When people invoke "rules" of international law in relation to Israel, it is
always worth asking, where if anywhere, they have been applied before. If the
answer is that they are based on an "emerging norm," or on Israel's unique
factual circumstances, so that the rule by definition can only apply in one case
- it means there is no rule.

And by the way, while the U.S. prepares to stop giving electricity to
Afghanistan, Israel is repairing power lines to Gaza in order to continue
providing power to Gaza. The power lines, in Israeli territory, had been damaged
by Hamas rocket fire. The repair work is done under close security for fear of
sniping from Gaza.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


