                             2311 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 31, 2014 Thursday 11:26 PM EST

Hamas tunnels stoke anxiety, bolstering Israelis' support of war;
The Israeli military says it has discovered 32 underground passages from Gaza to
its soil.

BYLINE: William Booth;Ruth Eglash

LENGTH: 1178 words


JERUSALEM - Of all the threats posed by Islamist militants in the Gaza Strip,
nothing - not Hamas drones, not rockets that reach Tel Aviv - can match the fear
Israelis feel about the dozens of newly discovered "terror tunnels" burrowed
into their back yards.

Internet videos posted by the Israeli military and its antagonist Hamas, which
show masked militants armed with rocket propelled-grenades crawling out of holes
in the ground, have shaken Israel. So have stories, almost certainly untrue but
widely promoted by social media, that children in Israel can hear shoveling
beneath their beds.

The anxiety is stoking unprecedented domestic support for Israel's military
offensive in Gaza, despite international condemnation over soaring Palestinian
civilian casualties. In repeated polls, a majority of Israelis have said they
want the war to go on as long as it takes to destroy the subterranean threat.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu laid down a red line at a security cabinet
meeting in Tel Aviv on Thursday highlighting the importance of tunnels. "With or
without a cease-fire," he vowed, Israel will not withdraw its ground forces from
Gaza until all tunnels into Israel are destroyed. When a 72-hour humanitarian
pause was announced early Friday by the United Nations, it allowed for Israeli
troops to remain in place inside Gaza, where tunnel demolition will likely
continue.

"I won't agree to any proposal that will not enable the Israeli military to
complete this important task for the sake of Israel's security," Netanyahu said,
adding that the tunnels allow Hamas to "abduct and murder civilians and
soldiers."

The Israeli military says it has discovered 32 "offensive tunnels" that begin in
Gaza and point east toward Israel. On Thursday, an Israeli intelligence officer
said in an interview that only a third of those tunnels reach all the way into
Israeli territory. Hamas has used tunnels to carry out at least three attacks
against Israeli soldiers during the three-week-old conflict.

Mushir al-Masri, a Hamas politician and spokesman, appeared on Al-Aqsa TV this
week, boasting that the Israelis had destroyed only a fraction of the tunnels
dug by fighters with their fingernails.

"And we will dig many more, God willing," he said.

Gaza is a narrow-waisted coastal enclave bordered by Israel, Egypt and the
Mediterranean Sea. Surrounding the area are no man's lands, high fences built by
Israel and topped with machine guns, and watchtowers. To get at the Israelis,
Hamas chose to dig.

In 2006, the group used a tunnel to capture Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, who
was held captive for five years. Military officials say tunnels were also widely
used during a three-week war between Israel and Hamas that began at the end of
2008.

These tunnels are quite different from the hundreds of smuggling tunnels that
until recently connected Gaza and Egypt. Those for-profit passageways were used
to ferry food, fuel and even automobiles into the Palestinian territory to
bypass Israeli and Egyptian blockades. Hamas, the militant group that controls
Gaza, demanded a tax on every item. Israel alleges that those tunnels were also
used to import weapons and rocket-making materials.

There are also "hundreds, maybe thousands" of other underground structures in
Gaza, said Atai Shelach, a former commander of an elite Israeli military
engineering unit, describing militant bunkers, stockrooms, command centers and
refuges for Hamas leaders and fighters.

The underground passageways are reinforced with cement, electric lights, trolley
tracks and weapons-storage caches and - in at least one case, the Israeli
military said - supplied with a "kidnap kit" that included vials of
tranquilizers and plastic handcuffs. The tunnels extend for two kilometers
(about 11 / 4 miles) or more, starting in greenhouses, basements, mosques and
clinics in Gaza and emerging in fields in Israel.

The tunnels were constructed - quietly, methodically, over months and years - by
burrowers who used pneumatic drills and were guided by a knowledge of Gaza
geology. To foil Israeli surveillance, Hamas hid sand and soil in sacks that
United Nations organizations used to distribute bulk food, according to Israeli
military officers.

The underground passageways are an average of 60 to 80 feet deep and can have a
dozen exits or entrances - like a fork with many tines. Some contain booby
traps, which have killed or injured several Israeli soldiers in recent weeks.
The Israeli military sends in sniffer dogs and robots with video cameras first;
bulldozers and dynamite follow.

"The biggest challenge is to locate the tunnels. Destroying them is simple,"
Shelach said. "We won't find them all. And the minute we leave, they will start
digging again."

Hamas fighters have emerged from tunnels during the past 24 days of fighting to
ambush and strike Israeli forces. One video released by Hamas this week shows a
group of masked militants, carrying automatic weapons and grenade launchers,
crawl from a hole in the ground. They run across a field in daylight and then
attack a group of Israeli soldiers manning one of the observation towers along
the Gaza border fence. Five soldiers were killed.

Israeli military officials estimate that the tunnels cost $500,000 to $2Â million
to build and maintain and that one tunnel might take 800 tons of cement - large
investments in a place where Israel has restricted construction materials and
Hamas has struggled to pay public workers.

"The tunnels cost Hamas time and money," said Reuven Erlich, a former Israeli
intelligence officer who is now director of the Meir Amit Intelligence and
Terrorism Information Center.

Avi Melamed, a fellow at the Eisenhower Institute in Washington and a former
senior Israeli intelligence officer in Israel, said that Mohammed Deif, who
heads Hamas's military wing, was charged with developing the tunnels to "move
its war into Israeli territory."

Retired Col. Yossi Langotsky, a geologist who was hired by the Israel Defense
Ministry a decade ago to develop ways to shut down tunnels, said he repeatedly
warned military leaders then that Hamas was building the passageways.

"This is a big mess," he said.  "I am just praying now that there will not be a
committee of investigation into the matter and I will be asked to show the tens
of warnings that were sent to them."

A senior military official, who could not be named according to military
protocol, said it "takes a long time to shut down hundreds of tunnels."

"We have learned a lot over the past few weeks on how to find tunnels," he said,
estimating that the military would need just days - not weeks - to destroy all
of them.

"Every day, you realize how dangerous and crazy it would be if suddenly Hamas
militants would come out of two or three or four tunnels at a time," said Sarit
Ariely, a resident of the southern coastal town of Ashkelon, who said that
Israel had no choice but to destroy every tunnel.

"I live only 10 minutes from the tunnels, and only once we demolish them will we
feel safe again," she said.

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


