                             2390 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     August 27, 2014 Wednesday 7:05 PM EST

Ukraine accuses Russia of stepping up military activity in Crimea;
A military spokesman says Russia is trying to create a "second front" for
separatists in southeastern Ukraine.

BYLINE: Annie Gowen;Karoun Demirjian

LENGTH: 1698 words


KIEV, Ukraine - Ukraine accused Russia on Wednesday of stepping up military
activity in the annexed territory of Crimea and sending in troops to help
separatists near a key seaport in southeastern Ukraine.

In a briefing Wednesday, Andriy Lysenko, a spokesman for the Ukrainian military,
said that Russian troops are increasing their activity in Crimea, the autonomous
Ukrainian peninsula that was taken over by pro-Russian separatists and annexed
by Moscow in March. According to NATO, Russia has already massed about 20,000
combat-ready troops along Ukraine's border.

Lysenko cited Ukrainian military intelligence reports as showing that Russian
units are conducting surveillance with drones from Crimea. He said three Russian
military helicopters have violated Ukrainian airspace from the territory.

Heavy shelling and fighting continued, meanwhile, near the southern city of
Novoazovsk, a port on the Sea of Azov, near where the Ukrainian military said
Russian tanks and armored personnel carriers entered the country on Monday.
Ukraine says that Russia in recent days has attempted to create a "second front"
there, adding to rebel strongholds in the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk.

Lysenko said Russian troops working alongside separatists have taken over
villages north of Novoazovsk, as well as the city of Starobeshevo, where the
local hospital was destroyed.

Compounding the Russian threat to the country, according to Ukrainian Prime
Minister Arseniy Yatensyuk, is a purported Russian plan to cut off gas supplies
to Europe that go through Ukraine this winter.

"We know about the plans to completely block the transit [of gas] to E.U. member
states," Yatensyuk told government ministers in Kiev, the Ukrainian news agency
UNIAN reported. "We know about the plans to disable all energy resources going
to Ukraine." He called the energy situation in Ukraine very difficult, the
agency said.

The developments came a day after Russian President VladiÂ­mir Putin and
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko held bilateral talks after a regional
summit in Minsk, the capital of Belarus.

Hopes for a breakthrough had already dimmed, but a Ukrainian announcement
earlier in the day that its forces had captured 10 Russian paratroopers in the
Donetsk region - combined with the release of video evidence - made the
two-hour, one-on-one discussion even more difficult.

Following the meeting, Poroshenko said a "road map" would be prepared to end the
fighting between troops and pro-Russian separatists in the east of the country,
the British Broadcasting Corp. reported.

Afterward, Putin said he had told Poroshenko that Kiev must take the initiative
in working out a peace agreement with the separatists in eastern Ukraine. "We
talked about the need to end bloodshed as soon as possible, about the need to
shift toward political resolution of all issues," Putin told journalists in
Minsk, according to the Reuters news agency. "Russia, for its part, will do
everything to support this peace process if it starts."

But the capture of the Russian paratroopers left Moscow more exposed as a
participant in the fighting in Ukraine than it has sought to portray itself.
Having previously derided Kiev's claims of Russian intervention in the
separatist war in eastern Ukraine, Moscow this time simply claimed that the
paratroopers had entered Ukraine by mistake. Putin noted that Ukrainian soldiers
had wandered into Russia earlier this month.

At his news briefing Wednesday, Lysenko showed a new video of the Russian
paratroopers. In it, nine of the 10, wearing camouflage sweatshirts, stepped
forward and gave their names and division number. The deputy commander of the
men said they had "illegally come into the territory of Ukraine" for what they
thought was a military exercise and were captured. Afterward, their documents
and telephones were seized and they were detained. The commander, Sgt. Vladimir
Sevasteev, said they wanted to be sent home to Russia.

"Please help us," the deputy commander said. "We don't want to shoot at
Ukrainian people. We are here illegally."

A soldier who did not appear in the video was a driver who was injured in the
fighting and  is being treated at a military hospital, Lysenko said.

The incursion - or act of unintentional trespassing - followed Russian moves
that have provoked a strong reaction among American officials.

"The new columns of Russian tanks and armor crossing into Ukraine indicates a
Russian-directed counteroffensive may be underway," tweeted the U.S. ambassador
to Ukraine, Geoffrey R. Pyatt.

"What we have seen are repeated provocations by the Russian regime to further
escalate tensions in the region," White House press secretary Josh Earnest told
reporters. He called Russian intervention in Ukraine, including the sending of a
humanitarian convoy without Kiev's permission, "a pretty flagrant escalation of
this situation."

State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said, "These incursions indicate a
Russian-directed counteroffensive is likely under way in Donetsk and Luhansk."
She added: "Clearly, that is of deep concern to us, but we're also concerned by
the Russian government's unwillingness to tell the truth, even as its soldiers
are found 30 miles inside Ukraine."

At their meeting, Putin and Poroshenko did reach an agreement on how to
distribute aid to civilians in the separatist Luhansk region, the Interfax news
agency reported. But Putin said that Russia could not discuss the terms of a
cease-fire with Ukraine.

Russia may not want to talk cease-fire terms, but it also isn't interested in
breaking up Ukraine, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said Wednesday.

"We are not interested in breaking up the state," Lavrov said, when asked at a
youth forum why Russia has not yet recognized the rebels' self-proclaimed
Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics as a state.

But Russia's permanent mission to NATO did say Wednesday that it would take
steps to prevent NATO's encroachment eastward.

Finland's president said Tuesday that he would consider seeking NATO membership
for his country in light of Russia's recent apparent incursions into Ukraine.

Ukrainian representatives are expected to attend a series of meetings with
European Union members in the upcoming days, including on Aug. 30, when
Poroshenko will attend a meeting of the European Commission in Brussels.

Poroshenko has previously expressed interest in joining the E.U. sometime after
2020.

They agreed to resume talks on sending gas through Ukraine to Europe, Putin said
afterward - a conversation that ran off the rails at various stages after Russia
jacked up gas prices for Kiev by more than 40 percent this spring and Ukraine
threatened to block all Russian gas exports through Ukrainian territory.

At the public session of the Minsk meeting, which included representatives from
the Eurasian Customs Union of Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, as well as the
European Union, Putin virtually ignored the conflict in Ukraine, except to say
that he is against military escalation, and focused on economic concerns.

He warned of the potential harm to Russia and its customs union partners if
Ukraine proceeds with a trade agreement with the European Union. Moscow fears
that European manufacturers would ship goods through Ukraine, relabel them and
avoid customs duties. Putin threatened Ukraine with unspecified consequences if
it moves ahead on the trade pact. Poroshenko has said he wants the Ukrainian
parliament to ratify the agreement in September.

Ukraine's foreign minister, Pavlo Klimkin, said Wednesday that Ukraine had
absolutely no intention of renegotiating the agreement to allay Russia's
concerns.

"Our Russian colleagues should not engage in wishful thinking," Klimkin tweeted.
"We will not change the text of the agreement. We will ratify and implement it."

That trade agreement has been at the center of the Ukrainian crisis. When, under
Russian pressure, then-President Viktor Yanukovych backed away last fall from
signing it, the protests that led to his ouster broke out. After he fled to
Russia in February, Moscow's forces seized Crimea, and the separatist movement
in the east sprang into action.

Catherine Ashton, the European Union's top security and foreign affairs
official, told reporters that the participants in the first, broader meeting had
not "directly discussed" the Ukrainian videos depicting the apprehended
soldiers.

But the recordings were revealing.

One paratrooper named Sergei Smirnov said in an interrogation video that he was
a "contractor" in the Russian army who had come to Ukraine "for training." He
added that he did not know he was in Ukraine until "we went through a village
and saw a Ukrainian tank."

Lysenko, the Ukrainian military spokesman, told a briefing in Kiev on Tuesday
that the detained Russian soldiers said they took a train to the Rostov region
in Russia on Aug. 23 and joined "a march" around 3 a.m. the following day in a
column of dozens of armored personnel carriers. The soldiers said that only the
commanders knew they were going into Ukraine; the soldiers thought they were
going for training.

Asked about the assertion by Russian officials that the troops had accidentally
crossed the border, Lysenko said: "If elite troops do not know topography and do
not know their locality, I can say nothing about that. . . . We believe that was
not a mistake." Rather, he said, it was "a special task executed."

The soldiers have been "detained" but are not prisoners, Lysenko said. Ukraine
has launched a criminal investigation into their activities.

Lysenko also said that for the first time since the conflict began, Ukrainian
border guards were fired at on Monday in the Luhansk region by two Russian
military helicopters. Four border guards died and three were injured, he said.

The incident came just days after Russia sent a convoy of humanitarian aid
trucks - whose purpose, even now, is murky - into Ukrainian territory, provoking
international condemnation. The Russian government said Monday that it would
send a second convoy, and its path may be smoother if the agreement between
Putin and Poroshenko sticks.

annie.gowen@washpost.com

karoun.demirjian@washpost.com

William Branigin in Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


