                             2301 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 30, 2014 Wednesday 11:57 AM EST

Israel presses attack on Gaza Strip; 16 killed at U.N. school;
Gaza Health Ministry officials said 40 people were killed in Israeli strikes
overnight and more than 110 injured.

BYLINE: Sudarsan Raghavan;William Booth;Ruth Eglash

LENGTH: 1176 words


GAZA CITY -  At least 16 people were killed and dozens wounded early Wednesday
when shells slammed into a  crowded U.N. school in the Gaza Strip that was being
used as a shelter for refugees in the conflict between Israel and Hamas,
according to Palestinian health officials.

The Israeli military later announced that it would implement a temporary
cease-fire in the Gaza Strip between 3 p.m. and 7 p.m. Wednesday. The cease-fire
would not apply to areas in which Israeli military is currently operating, it
said.

A spokesman for the Israeli army, Capt. Eytan Buchman, said Israeli forces in
Gaza came under mortar fire earlier Wednesday from a point near the U.N.-run
school in the Jebaliya refugee camp and responded toward the source of the fire.
The incident is being reviewed, he said.

Gaza Health Ministry officials said 40 people were killed in Israeli strikes
overnight and more than 110 injured as Israel pressed ahead with its escalated
campaign against the coastal enclave. The Palestinian death toll rose to more
than 1,270 people, most of them civilians, according to the United Nations.
Israel has lost 53 soldiers in the conflict, its largest toll since its 2006 war
in Lebanon. Mortar and rocket attacks from Gaza have also killed two Israeli
civilians and a Thai worker.

The school strike came one day after some of the heaviest Israeli bombardment in
the conflict, during which Israel disabled Gaza's only electricity plant,
leaving the crowded territory's 1.8 million residents with no electricity or
running water.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu warned his country in a televised
address Monday evening to be prepared for a prolonged campaign against Hamas,
the Islamist militant group that rules the Gaza Strip. Israel has said it cannot
stop until it dismantles  a network of tunnels it says are used by militants to
infiltrate into Israel from Gaza.

Witnesses at the Jebaliya Primary School for Girls, where Wednesday's attack
took place, said shelling struck a classroom where some 50 people, mostly women
and children, were sleeping. The classroom's roof was ripped apart. Most of the
dead, however, were young men, who had woken for the traditional Muslim dawn
prayer, said Moen al-Masr, a doctor at the Kamal Odwan hospital. He said 10
people were seriously injured in the attack.

"We found people torn to pieces," said Allah al-Bes, 33, who was seeking refuge
at the school with his wife and three boys. "It was like hell." Bes and his
family went to the school  after an earlier attack on a U.N.-run school in Beit
Hanoun. "We have learned no place is safe in Gaza," he said.

Expanding its list of targets Tuesday, Israel destroyed the family home of
Ismail Haniyeh, the top leader of Hamas. Other airstrikes hit Hamas's al-Aqsa
television broadcast center, a finance building and the homes of local mayors.
Haniyeh is in hiding and his whereabouts are unknown.

Along the coast of the seaside enclave, Israel also hit a fishing harbor near
hotels where scores of international journalists are staying. Airstrikes also
hit the Rafah area, along Gaza's border with Egypt, according to local news
reports.

Israel said Tuesday afternoon that its forces had come under attack from
militants in Gaza emerging from a concealed tunnel. A gun battle followed,
although no details were immediately available. The Israeli military reported a
similar infiltration Monday evening, saying five soldiers were killed in a
battle with militants from Gaza who entered southern Israel via a tunnel. At
least one militant died.

Rocket barrages from Gaza sent people in Tel Aviv, Israel's commercial capital,
scurrying to shelters early Tuesday.

In the center of Gaza City, an airstrike obliterated al-Amin Mohammed Mosque
opposite the Gaza home of Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas. In
2007, when it seized control of Gaza, Hamas took over the home and used it to
house senior leaders. The militants handed it back to Abbas earlier this year
after Hamas and the Palestinian Authority reached an agreement on forming a
unity government.

Neighbors said that the mosque was not Hamas-run and that anyone could pray
there.

"This is a mosque for the public, and I am one of the public," said Muhammed
Abdu, a 45-year-old engineer, as he looked at a cavernous hole filed with debris
where the mosque had stood. "This is all part of a strategy to burn Gaza down."

He said the attack underscored the need for a cease-fire. But like many Gazans
interviewed over the past two days, Abdu said the core Palestinian demand of
lifting an economic blockade by Israel and Egypt should be met.

"To bring milk in for your child, is that a crime?" Abdu asked. "To have an open
crossing so that you can leave for medical care, is that a crime? To travel
outside for your business, is that a crime?"

Near the Nusairat refuÂ­gee camp, in the middle of the Gaza Strip, the shattered
fuel tank of the territory's primary power plant continued to emit flames and
thick plumes of smoke hours after being hit.

The plant is Gaza's primary source of electricity, powering sewage treatment
systems, water pumps and hospitals, said Dardasawi, the Palestinian official. It
is especially important, he added, because six of eight electricity supply lines
that run from Israel were damaged. Egypt also supplies some electricity, he
added, but hardly enough to power the border town of Rafah.

"This is like a time bomb," said Dardasawi, referring to the potential
humanitarian crisis.

Outside Haniyeh's wrecked house in the Beach Camp neighborhood of Gaza City,
neighbors gathered Tuesday to express anger. Not far away, 10 people, including
seven children, were killed in an attack Monday that Hamas and Israel blamed on
each other.

Neighbors said Haniyeh and his family had not lived in the house since the
conflict erupted. The dwelling, they said, was hit around 2 a.m., and no one was
killed or injured. Israel's military, they said, phoned a neighbor around 1:45
a.m. with instructions to tell other residents on the street to evacuate.

But most fled when they heard two small missiles from an Israeli drone strike
the house, presumably as a warning, residents said. Minutes later, a powerful
airstrike, possibly by an Israeli F-16, brought down the house in a pinpoint
attack that did little serious damage to the surrounding homes in this densely
packed enclave.

Some neighbors said Tuesday that the attack made them support Hamas even more
and that they would never accept a cease-fire until Palestinian demands were
met.

"Israel said it wouldn't target him because he is a politician," said Wasifiyah
Hassonehm, 53, who lives two houses down. "Now, they are targeting everyone -
the politicians, the civilians, everyone."

In an e-mailed statement to journalists, Haniyeh said the attack would not deter
Hamas. "Destroying our homes will not change our attitude, but it will
strengthen it," he said.

sudarsan.raghavan@washpost.com

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

Booth and Eglash reported from Jerusalem. Daniela Deane in Rome contributed to
this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


