                             2476 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                  In the Loop

                      October 2, 2014 Thursday 3:57 PM EST

Former defense secretary Panetta drones Obama Iraq policy in new book

BYLINE: Al Kamen

LENGTH: 293 words


Tell-all memoirs can be tough when they actually, well, tell all. But it would
be hard to surpass the shot that Leon Panetta, President Obama' s former CIA
director and secretary of defense, takes at his former boss and the White House
foreign policy team in his new book: "Worthy Fights."

A book excerpt in Time MagazineÂ Thursday recounts the internal battles over the
timing of the withdrawal of U.S troops from Iraq and whether a residual force
would remain. Panetta and other Pentagon officials argued for keeping that
force.

"My fear, as I voiced to the President and others," Panetta writes, "was that if
the country split apart or slid back into the violence that we'd seen in the
years immediately following the U.S. invasion, it could become a new haven for
terrorists to plot attacks against the U.S." He adds that his stance "reflected
not just my views but also those of the military commanders in the region and
the Joint Chiefs."

Then, particularly damaging as the nation struggles with the Islamic State and a
destabilized region, Panetta suggests Obama's team put political promises before
good foreign policy.

"But the President's team at the White House pushed back, " he recalls, "and the
differences occasionally became heated. [Undersecretary of Defense Michele]
Flournoy argued our case, and those on our side viewed the White House as so
eager to rid itself of Iraq that it was willing to withdraw rather than lock in
arrangements that would preserve our influence and interests."

The White House, Panetta writes, "coordinated the negotiations but never led
them. . . but without the President's active advocacy, al-Maliki was allowed to
slip away."

And Obama had such nice things to say about Panetta at his Pentagon farewell
ceremony last year.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


