                             2426 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                    September 11, 2014 Thursday 3:01 PM EST

Time to pin down the potential 2016 contenders on how they would fight the
Islamic State

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 974 words


If you had issues with President Obama's speech, check out the "fact sheet"Â put
out by the White House. The administration declares: "Foreign terrorist fighters
are ISIL's lifeblood, and a global security threat-with citizens of nearly 80
countries filling its ranks. Over 100 foreign fighters from the United States
have traveled or attempted to travel to the conflict. On September 24, the
United States will convene an historic Summit-level meeting of the UN Security
Council, focused on this issue." Call a U.N. meeting? Senate candidate Scott
Brown and Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) have already proposed stripping American
jihadists of citizenship and thereby canceling their passports, but we also must
be sober about the communications between Americans and terror groups overseas.

The number of foreign fighters should remind us of the necessity of gathering
information about jihadi recruitment as well as plots against the United States
or our allies. Efforts to dismantle the National Security Agency data collection
program are begging for disaster.

Most disturbing, the administration insists: "We will continue to use the
criminal justice system as a critical tool in our counterterrorism toolbox.
Federal criminal laws provide a sound basis to prosecute those who provide
material support to ISIL or who conspire with ISIL to plot attacks at home or
abroad." No, no, no. The purpose of anti-terror efforts is not to build a case,
but to gather intelligence so that we can stop attacks and kill terrorists. We
should stop letting jihadists out of the Guantanamo Bay prison, stop Mirandizing
terrorists and stop treating terrorists, including American jihadists, as
protected by due process (e.g. handcuffing ourselves in the use of drones). This
is a sure sign of unseriousness about the war against jihadists.

These issues - as well as the emphatic rejection of ground troops, the assertion
that Somalia and Yemen are examples of success and that the Islamic State is
neither Islamic nor a state - reflect moral and factual confusion about our
enemies. The administration displays a tendency to rewrite the past and
misrepresent the present. (While getting drubbed by Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.)
last night, former press secretary Jay Carney kept insisting that the president
could not have left troops in Iraq and that the Free Syrian Army is in better
shape now than it was a year or so ago. As McCain said, Carney had his facts
wrong.) We can speculate whether that accounts for the half-hearted policies or
whether the half-hearted policies force the administration to dissemble, but if
candidates are going to run for president to improve upon national security - be
more "aggressive" and "decisive," as Hillary Clinton's flacks were telling the
media - then we should ask if they disagree with these assumptions and the
president's goals that flow from them.

Are we going to continue with the criminal justice mode as the White House would
like? If we truly want to be more "aggressive," we should not Mirandize
terrorists, disparage information-gathering or insist on civilian trials for
terrorists.

Do they think the Islamic State isn't Islamic or a state, as Obama suggests?
Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), appearing on Fox News last night, commended the
president for this "important point." Does Hillary Clinton agree, or is she
willing to recognize that what we are dealing with in all these countries is
Islamic jihadism that seeks to eradicate nation states and kill nonbelievers?

What do we do about foreign fighters? Cruz doesn't want to rely on a U.N.
meeting. We should hear from others with presidential ambitions about their game
plans.

And, really, are Somalia and Yemen the desired outcome? Again, Cruz thinks this
is wacky. Last night on Fox News he explained, "That does not prompt confidence,
because in Yemen and Somalia, our approach has been altogether ineffective." It
would seem to be this sort of indecisive, fatalistic attitude (Well, Yemen's the
best we can do!) that Clinton's spinners say she opposes. So does Clinton take
issue with the president's comparison, which amounts to an admission that we are
seeking containment?

Who else wants to rule out military options? This is one fundamental distinction
between a conflicted commander in chief and one who wants to convey resolve.
Texas Gov. Rick Perry (R) has already said in no uncertain terms that "signaling
to your enemy what you are not going to put on the table is very, very bad -
both strategic and tactical errors by this administration. We need to have all
of our options open": Are Hillary Clinton, Rand Paul and others in the Perry
camp or the Obama camp?

How do we defeat the transnational Islamic State? Obama finally signaled that he
would bomb on both sides of the border, but air power alone (take a look at
Libya) is rarely sufficient. Obama now wants to aid and train the Free Syrian
Army. Just months ago he disparaged them as "former doctors, farmers,
pharmacists and so forth" and ridiculed the idea of arming them as a "fantasy."
Clinton says she advocated help for the non-jihadi rebels but was rebuffed by
the president. Paul and Cruz don't want to aid these people, claiming in effect
that we are giving help to the jihadi rebels. So how then do they propose to
root out Islamists from Syria?

It is one thing to generically criticize the president, but it is another to
spell out what specifically is wrong and what alternatives you would pursue.
Clinton didn't do this in her book, oddly enough. Now, however, it's time to pin
her - and her potential adversaries - down. They need to explain their
conception of our foe, set a goal (is it "degrade" or really "destroy"?) and set
forth means to achieve that end. Otherwise, how are they any different from
Obama?

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


