                             254 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        June 20, 2014 Friday 7:44 PM EST

Over Afghanistan, drones that vanished without a trace

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

LENGTH: 823 words


Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 isn't the only large aircraft to vanish
mysteriously without a trace. Four U.S. Air Force Predator drones have
disappeared into thin air while flying over Afghanistan - never to be seen
again.

The still-missing, but presumed dead, aerial robots were among 400-plus large
U.S. military drones involved in major accidents around the world between 2001
and 2013, according to a yearlong Washington Post investigation.

Each of the four Predators was armed with Hellfire missiles when they took off
into the wild blue yonder, according to Air Force accident-investigation records
obtained by The Post.

(Read The Post's yearlong investigation into drones: "When drones fall from the
sky."

In each case, the pilots who were flying the Predators by remote control from
the ground lost their satellite links with the aircraft, so they couldn't
communicate. The drones' transponders also stopped working and they didn't show
up anywhere on radar. That can occur if there's a sudden and complete loss in
electrical power - caused by, say, a giant bolt of lightning. But without any
eyewitnesses or physical evidence or witnesses, Air Force investigators could
only guess at what happened in these instances:

Date of disappearance: July 21, 2008              Identity: MQ-1B Predator, tail
number 05-3135              Last known location: About 100 nautical miles
north-northeast of Kandahar Air Base              Estimated loss: $3.8 million
Unit: 3rd Special Operations Squadron, 27th Special Operations Wing, Air Force
Special Operations Command

An armed Predator presumably crashed after it lost link and disappeared while
flying over Afghanistan during a power loss to the ground-control station at
Cannon Air Force Base in New Mexico. Two other Predators flying in Afghanistan
lost their links at the same time because of the power failure. The crew
regained power and was able to regain links to those two drones. The Predator
that disappeared was pre-programmed to return to base in the event of a lost
link but for some reason did not. Investigators speculated that it flew into
hazardous weather and crashed. The aircraft should have returned to base
automatically after the lost link, but it disappeared from radar and ground
crews never found it

Date of disappearance: May 13, 2009              Identity: MQ-1B Predator, tail
number 07-3183              Last known location: somewhere over Afghanistan,
exact location classified              Estimated loss: $3.9 million
Unit: 15th Reconnaissance Squadron, 432nd Wing, Air Combat Command

An armed Predator mysteriously vanished in Afghanistan about fiveÂ hours into a
flight. The skies were clear and the aircraft was flying well above a mountain
range when the return satellite data link was lost to Creech Air Force Base in
Nevada. The transponder signal was lost three minutes later. Investigators
concluded that there was no evidence of bad weather, icing, fuel loss or pilot
error. A sergeant raised the possibility that the aircraft could have had its
satellite links hacked or hijacked, saying: "If somebody else was on the same
frequencies, they could have taken over the aircraft or just knocked it out
completely." Investigators found no evidence of hacking.

Date of disappearance:              June 5, 2011              Identity: MQ-1B
Predator, tail number 07-3204              Last known location: 60 nautical
miles northeast of Jalalabad; very close to Pakistani border
Estimated loss: $4.4 million              Unit: 20th Reconnaissance Squadron,
432nd Air Expeditionary Wing, Air Combat Command

An armed Predator was apparently struck by lightning and presumably crashed. The
aircraft lost satellite links after the lightning strike and was not recovered.
The crew knew it was flying in the vicinity of thunderstorms but had an urgent
mission to assist ground troops in the area who were under enemy fire.

Date of disappearance:              July 10, 2011              Identity: MQ-1B
Predator, tail number 06-3174              Last known location: about 20 miles
south of Jalalabad              Estimated loss: $4.4 million              Unit:
3rd Special Operations Squadron, 27th Special Operations Wing, Air Force Special
Operations Command

An armed Predator disappeared and presumably crashed. It was the third Predator
crash near Jalalabad in five weeks. In each case, the drones lost their
satellite links and did not fly their emergency pre-programmed mission. Unlike
the other accidents in the vicinity of Jalalabad, the weather in this case was
clear and investigators were unable to determine a cause. They found no evidence
of maintenance or operational problems prior to the lost link. The aircraft had
been flying for about 19 hours but still had 138 gallons of fuel in the tank.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


