                             2508 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 22, 2014 Wednesday 6:06 PM EST

The verdict(s) on "Klinghoffer:" a review roundup;
A roundup of reviews of the Metropolitan Opera's "Death of Klinghoffer,"
including Anne Midgette's revised version.

BYLINE: Anne Midgette

LENGTH: 1243 words


I am still in the process of reading all of the critical responses that have
appeared so far to the "Death of Klinghoffer" at the Metropolitan Opera, and I
know more will follow. I am compiling all the links here in part simply as a
service to myself, but I'm sure I'm not the only person who is interested in the
discussion. I'll keep adding more as I get them. (ETA: Thanks to Lisa Hirsch at
Iron Tongue of Midnight for her own compilation, which added several to my
list.)

A further addendum: After my review ran online, I rewrote it completely for the
print edition of the Washington Post. Due to complications with various
publishing platforms, however, the on-line version, rather than the rewritten
version, is what made it into print. Since I took the trouble to write it, I am
further blurring the for-print/online distinction by running it below - online.

Anthony Tommasini in The New York Times

Justin Davidson in New York Magazine

James Jorden in the New York Observer

Manuela Hoelterhoff on Bloomberg.com

Martin Bernheimer in The Financial Times

Heidi Waleson in The Wall Street Journal

Mark Swed in The Los Angeles Times

Joe Dziemieanowicz in The New York Daily News

John Yohalem on Parterre.com

George Grella in New York Classical Review

Paul Pelkonen on Superconductor

Ivy on Poison Ivy's Wall of Text

Pamela McCorduck on Iron Tongue of Midnight

Sam Reising on I Care if You Listen

Four New Yorkers with four different perspectives in The Guardian

Michael Walsh on Unexamined Premises (he writes about the brouhaha, and posts
his review of the 1991 world premiere at the end)

Ami Eden in the Jewish Telegraph

Tim Smith in The Baltimore Sun

"Embattled 'Klinghoffer' plays the Met."

by Anne Midgette

NEW YORK - After months of increasingly heated debate, and in the midst of
much-heralded protests and the largest police presence Lincoln Center has seen
for some time, John Adams's opera "The Death of Klinghoffer" finally made it to
the Metropolitan Opera on Monday night. The work, based on the 1985 hijacking of
the cruise ship Achille Lauro and the attendant murder of a passenger who was
American, Jewish, and in a wheelchair, has been called anti-Semitic by some and
a masterpiece by others. Monday's performance may not have changed anybody's
mind; it proved, like the protests, somewhat inconclusive.

It was, however, received with ovations - justified accolades for the fine
musicians who had braved a lot of heat, and even threats, to make sure that the
show went on. There was particular applause for David Robertson, the elegant and
sometimes overpowering conductor, and even a roar of approval for Adams, who was
surely braced, when he walked out on stage, for a more mixed reaction. Although
the accolades were all deserved, it was odd to see such adulation for a piece
that remains, ultimately, a deeply flawed opera.

Following the success of "Nixon in China," Adams's first "docu-opera" with the
team of Peter Sellars (as creator-director) and Alice Goodman (as librettist),
"The Death of Klinghoffer" targeted another provocative contemporary topic,
aiming to show both sides of the Israeli-Palestinian debate in a work conceived
as a kind of modern-day answer to the Bach Passions. Adams's music in this piece
has moved from the kinetic, colorful zaniness of "Nixon in China" to a richer
and more nuanced vocabulary, with moving instrumental solos intertwining with
the voices, and shining choruses pregnant with tension. It's also a lot more
static. That isn't entirely his fault. Even the strongest music cannot redeem a
libretto as diffuse and verbose and full of blather as Goodman's tedious
"Klinghoffer" text. It drones on and on without actually being sure of what it
wants to say, and obfuscating rather than clarifying its points in the name of
"poetry" and "art," neither of which it serves.

Goodman was already guilty of this in "Nixon in China," but it's more obvious in
"Klinghoffer," because the subject is more incendiary and the pacing much
slower. You have plenty of time to notice, in other words, that the opera lacks
a strong point of view. It throws out a lot of ideas and takes refuge behind the
mantle of art to avoid actually thinking them through (the Palestinian scenes,
in Tom Morris's Met production, were a lot more pointed and incendiary than the
Jewish ones). Sellars's original production, indeed, aimed at a kind of
abstraction, with singers in simple white garments; by contrast Morris, and his
costume designer Laura Hopkins, offered 1980s-vintage tourist resort wear. The
production even projects explanatory texts on the wall to clarify what actually
happened in instances when the libretto's "poetic" moments are opaque.

There are a number of reasons that people conceive of this work as anti-Semitic,
but the loudest protesters seemed to focus on the most banal of them. The notion
that we should prohibit all works of art that allow the bad guys a point of view
would decimate the Western canon; while the idea that audiences might blindly go
out and emulate the behavior they see on stage is a canard that I've heard
applied to Wagner's "Ring" with equal ludicrousness at least, I've not
encountered any real-life cases of sibling incest following performances of "Die
Walk√ºre."

Warts and all, "Klinghoffer" has survived for 23 years for a reason: it still
represents a level of originality, certainly musically, that lifts it above much
of the herd of carefully workshopped, safe contemporary American operas. And the
Met certainly cast it well. Audience favorites, predictably, were Alan Opie, who
was moving and crusty as Klinghoffer, and Michaela Martens, warm and deep-voiced
as his wife, Marilyn, as well as Paulo Szot, the ship's captain-cum-narrator,
who had a wearyingly long part (Goodman's characters never sing for three
minutes when eight will do).

Given the tenor of the debate before the opening, being a dark-skinned singer
playing a terrorist - Sean Panikkar, Ryan Speedo Green, Aubrey Allicock or Maya
Lahyani - must have been a particularly daunting assignment, and all four of
them excelled. Colorful in supporting roles were Maria Zifchak as the Swiss
grandmother, Christopher Feigum as the first officer, and Theodora Hanslowe as
the woman who stayed hidden in her cabin for the whole hijacking. The creators'
intended points of comic relief have, with time, been eliminated or toned down,
and so it was with the single lighter moment, the bouncy aria for the British
dancing girl (Kate Miller-Heidke), which Robertson gave a muted reading.

Banning "Klinghoffer" from the stage is not the right answer. Neither is
celebrating it as a perfect work. Sadly, the debate surrounding this production
has not left room for much middle ground between the "pro" of fully endorsing
art's right to say whatever it wants and the "con" of not allowing art
unfettered access to the historical record, particularly if there are living
relatives to consider (the Klinghoffer daughters have come out strongly against
the opera, and wrote a statement that the Met printed in the program). Alas,
neither side has emerged with much understanding of the other, and the martyrdom
of Klinghoffer has blurred into the martyrdom of "Klinghoffer," the opera. Which
means that either you celebrate the Met or castigate the Met for putting it on,
and that the company, despite putting its best foot forward, once again provides
a polarizing example of opera's distance from the city it hoped, with this
production, to engage.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


