                             2565 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 13, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

Keeping peace in a faraway land

BYLINE: Michael Gerson

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A25

LENGTH: 791 words


Rwanda's ethnic conflict was a quarrel in a faraway country between people of
which we know nothing - until it became a byword for moral abdication in the
face of genocide. The same was true in Afghanistan, before it incubated a global
threat. Americans have learned, or should have learned, to be more
discriminating in their indifference.

The Central African Republic (CAR) now bids for historical notoriety. What began
as a military coup by the Muslim Seleka coalition this year became a national
rampage of looting, rape and summary executions. The conflict has attracted
foreign jihadists from Chad and Sudan, set off retribution by Christian
militias, caused the collapse of civilian authority and resulted in massive
dislocation and food shortages.

One vignette from a recent report by Human Rights Watch: In April, a funeral
procession crossed the Ngaragba Bridge toward a cemetery. A unit of Seleka
soldiers fired a rocket-propelled grenade into the crowd and began cutting down
those who tried to flee. A priest appealing for calm was killed. "After the
Seleka convoy started shooting at the crowd," reported an eyewitness, "a woman
with a baby on her back was on the street past the bridge when she was shot by a
Seleka fighter and left dead in the street with the baby crying on her back."

The international response to the CAR crisis has been relatively swift, though
hardly sufficient. The French - as in Mali - have taken the military lead in
attempting to disarm militias and hit squads, resulting in recent casualties and
significant domestic criticism for President Fran√ßois Hollande. France has
emerged as one of the few Western countries with its conscience and confidence
intact after the global exertions of the past decade. A few thousand African
Union troops are also on the ground in CAR, with a few hundred more (from
Burundi) being transported by the United States.

America has taken an active but secondary role - pushing at the United Nations
to authorize the French/African Union deployment and currently recruiting other
African nations to contribute forces.

Apart from the essential task of protecting civilians from murder, the most
important intervention may come in urging CAR religious leaders to reduce
tensions - to calm the paranoia on both sides and encourage trust. CAR has a
long history of political instability, but not of Muslim/Christian conflict and
hatred. Taking religion seriously is an often-neglected aspect of successful
diplomacy, and engaging religious leaders, in this case, may be the best way to
strengthen the majority impulse of coexistence.

These measures are important for their own sake; they also relate to a broader
regional challenge. While many African countries are making tremendous progress,
a number of weak and failed states have attracted parasitic Islamist movements,
organized in loose confederations, that exploit disorder and grievance to seek
influence and safe havens. This is the story of Mali, Somalia, northern Nigeria,
CAR and elsewhere.

The result is an emerging problem comparable in scope and threat to the one
found in the border regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan. Across North, East and
West Africa, terrorist groups trade narcotics, take hostages and demand ransom
to fund operations. They exploit porous borders, tribal resentments, extreme
poverty and fragile governments. We have witnessed (as we saw in the 1980s and
'90s) a series of terrorist attacks of escalating sophistication and ambition.
Suicide bombings in Uganda and Niger. Violence against U.S. targets in Libya and
Tunisia. Attacks on churches, schools and military posts in Nigeria. The assault
on the Amenas gas plant in Algeria (which took the lives of three Americans).
The massacre at the Westgate mall in Nairobi.

So far, these threats have been regional instead of global. But it would not
take much of a change in capability and ambition - perhaps through the emergence
of a charismatic, anti-American leader - to change that.

Over the past decade, the United States has gradually developed a regional
response, designed to be proactive while avoiding large-scale, direct
intervention: promoting economic development, instructing African governments in
counterter- rorism, conducting joint-training operations and sometimes deploying
military planning cells, commandos or drones. Central to these efforts is U.S.
financial and logistical support for proxies and peacekeepers - now needed in
CAR.

Americans and their representatives in Congress are often skeptical of
peacekeeping operations and reluctant to fund them. But the argument in their
favor is this: They promote stability, serve our interests and save innocent
lives without sending in the Marines.

michaelgerson@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


