                             2663 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       April 6, 2014 Sunday 10:46 PM EST

head here

BYLINE: Lenny Bernstein

SECTION: Outlook; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1387 words


You know the outcome of "Long Mile Home," a new book that reconstructs the
Boston Marathon bombing, even before you start reading. Thanks to days of
around-the-clock news coverage, the events of a year ago are still fresh in our
minds - the two bombs that exploded near the finish line, the carnage, the
rescues, the manhunt that shut down a U.S. metropolis, the capture of one
alleged bomber and the killing of another.  Â¶  Yet you can't look away. As the
authors describe the ordinary lives of five people caught up in the attack and
bring them inexorably together, with the dread of knowing where and how they
will become part of the same horrific afternoon, you are back in Boston again,
with the sickening feeling of seeing something terrible about to happen and
being powerless to stop it.

There is  Heather Abbott, who lost her lower left leg in the bombing. David
King, a trauma surgeon who ran the race and almost immediately began performing
emergency surgery on blast victims. Krystle Campbell, who was killed by the
first explosion. Police officer Shana Cottone, who was at the finish line that
day and helped save two victims. And race director  Dave McGillivray, who has
dedicated his entire life to the 117-year-old marathon.

The account by two Boston Globe reporters, Scott Helman and Jenna Russell,
succeeds in every way. It is a harrowing narrative of the events and a
behind-the-scenes look at the public officials and everyday people forever
changed by the attack. It is also a portrait of a major American city, its
psyche and the distance runners who consider the race a sacred rite.

In Massachusetts, the authors write, "there is hardly a bigger tradition than
Marathon Monday. . . . It's a chance to breathe in a place that defines
high-strung, a chance for Boston to put aside, at least for a moment, its
tribalism and fractiousness, to welcome outsiders to a town not always known for
its hospitality. To celebrate the top runners but also the stragglers, the
strivers, and the hobbyists, all of them laced up and pointed toward the sea."

Three spectators were killed and more than 260 injured by the two homemade
bombs, pressure cookers filled with gunpowder, nails, ball bearings and other
bits of metal that cut through crowds packed shoulder to shoulder at two spots
near the finish line. A police officer for the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology was slain days later, allegedly by 26-year-old Tamerlan Tsarnaev,
described as the mastermind of the plot, and his then-19-year-old brother
Dzhokhar, who was captured by police. The elder Tsarnaev died during a wild
shootout with police that is one of the book's most gripping scenes. Another is
the lengthy account of a carjacking victim who escaped the brothers after they
drove him around the Boston area for hours.

A year later, some victims are still struggling with their injuries, most
notably the 16 people who lost one or both legs to the explosives, which were
placed on the ground. (At an event that celebrates running, upper extremities
were spared, except for the finger of one victim.). Almost $61 million has been
distributed to the injured, and millions more are coming in July.

This year, Boston is planning an April 15 tribute to the victims, as well as the
first responders and medical personnel who undoubtedly kept the death toll from
rising with their skills, calm and quick decision-making. The race, with an
expanded field that includes about 5,600 people who could not finish last year
because of the bombing, will take place as usual on Patriots' Day, April 21,
under heightened security. Instead of the usual 500,000 spectators, organizers
expect 1 million.

The authors know Bostonians - at least to the eye of someone who has never lived
there - and they certainly understand marathoners. I have run many of the
major-city marathons, including Boston once, and I know the magic of standing at
the starting line in Hopkinton and the overwhelming emotion of finishing on
Boylston Street, 26.2 miles away.

"At heart, the Boston Marathon honors something very simple," the authors
explain in the prologue. "It celebrates life's constructive forces: good health,
fellowship, hard work, discipline, philanthropy, and a belief that we can push
ourselves to greater heights, especially alongside others reaching for them too.
. . . To line up in Hopkinton is to put your hand up, and say, Me too."

From there the book is a tautly written page-turner that profiles the five main
characters, others and the Tsarnaev brothers, two Chechen immigrants from
Kyrgyzstan whose lives fell apart as they struggled for the American dream in
Cambridge. There is not much about the brothers that an attentive reader has not
learned over the past year, with one important exception: The book raises the
possibility that Tamerlan Tsarnaev was mentally ill, hearing a voice that
commanded him at times as he turned to orthodox and then radical Islam.

Many have speculated that Dzhokhar Tsarnaev fell under his older brother's sway,
and that is the impression left here. With his parents split and back overseas,
he is depicted as a dope-dealing slacker, barely hanging on at the University of
Massachusetts at Dartmouth.

But there was nothing in his background to suggest that the sweet-faced former
high school wrestler might be headed toward terrorism until authorities looked
at his laptop after his capture and found material that promoted radical
interpretations of Islam. That includes a book whose foreword was written by
Anwar al-Awlaki, the U.S.-born radical cleric who helped inspire terrorist
attacks against Western targets before he was killed in a U.S. drone strike in
Yemen.

The book treads lightly over the decision to shut down Boston and some of its
suburbs during the manhunt for the younger Tsarnaev, an unprecedented move,
though it does illuminate the efforts of Gov. Deval Patrick, Boston Mayor Thomas
Menino and Police Commissioner Ed Davis to cope with events that unfolded in
rapid succession over five days.

Nor does it spend much time probing how a dragnet of hundreds of heavily armed
law enforcement personnel could miss Tsarnaev, wounded and bleeding, hiding in a
boat in a Watertown backyard. The suspect was discovered by the boat's owner
soon after the lockdown was lifted.

It is more thorough in describing the failures of U.S. and Russian
anti-terrorism authorities to identify Tamerlan Tsarnaev as a threat and the
missed opportunity when police did not investigate him in connection with a
triple homicide in quiet Waltham more than a year before the bombing.

The authors return to their strengths as they describe a region beginning to
heal. Campbell's wake and funeral are heartbreaking; later, a memorial gazebo is
dedicated by her family on her favorite island in Boston Harbor. Sean Collier,
the murdered MIT police officer, is posthumously awarded a spot on the
Somerville police force, which he had been preparing to join. Abbott makes the
wrenching decision to have her mangled left foot amputated, agreeing to let
surgeons remove healthy tissue above her ankle to improve the fit and mechanics
of her prosthesis. Then she returns to running.

And McGillivray keeps a promise made to his grandfather 40 years earlier that he
would run the marathon every spring until he was no longer able. Normally he did
that on Marathon Monday, in the afternoon, as the race was winding down and his
work was done. Last year, the bombing and its aftermath forced him to wait 11
days to set out from Hopkinton.

Though McGillivray's post-marathon runs are part of local legend, he and his
running partner tell no one of their plans. But the police, and then the media,
find out as they are en route, and McGillivray, embarrassed, is greeted by
sirens, a news helicopter and cheering fans as he crosses the finish line on
Boylston Street, "at the very spot where evil had visited his beloved race. . .
. With this run, this personal feat in defiance of the bombing, Dave McGillivray
wanted to make a statement," the authors write. " 'I felt, I can't let this act
of violence deter me from doing what I usually do,' he said. Much of Greater
Boston felt the same."

leonard.bernstein@washpost.com

Lenny Bernstein, The Washington Post's "To Your Health" blogger, has written
about the victims of the Boston Marathon bombing.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


