                             260 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 17, 2014 Thursday 3:19 PM EST

Don't look now, but the plan for massive drones on aircraft carriers is coming;

The Navy is set to release a Request for Proposals soon on its closely watched
UCLASS drone program.

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 557 words


The Navy landed a 44,000-pound drone aircraft on the USS George H.W. Bush for
the first time last summer, a technical feat that was hailed by Navy Secretary
Ray Mabus at the time as a historic development in a program that would
"radically change the way presence and combat power are delivered from aircraft
carriers." And indeed, the bat-winged X-47B remains intriguing: Flown by the
click of a computer mouse, it would offer surveillance and reconnaissance of
broad swathes of the ocean, and - unlike typical drones - refuel in the air when
needed.

Check out video of it in action:

The X-47B is seen by many as a precursor to an even larger fleet of drone
aircraft that will be unlike anything the U.S. military has. Known as the
Unmanned Carrier-Launched Airborne Surveillance and Strike (UCLASS), it calls
for "persistent, aircraft carrier-based intelligence, surveillance,
reconnaissance, targeting, and strike capability to support carrier air wing
operations," according to the Navy. But its future is anything but certain: As
USNI News and others have pointed out, there has been a spirited debate about
just how much strike capability the UCLASS drones should have.

Arming it to the teeth would make it potent weapon for the Navy when it has to
fly aircraft into contested airspace to take out enemy targets. Doing so could
potentially reduce casualties in situations where U.S. fighter pilots might
otherwise be shot down. But the more bells and whistles it has, the more
expensive it becomes - not ideal in an era when the Pentagon is looking to cut
costs.

The Navy is set to release a Request for Proposals soon, the head of the
program, Rear Adm. Mathias Winter told reporters at the Farnborough
International Airshow in London on Monday, Breaking Defense reported. Winter
said Joint Staff officials have had divergent views about what the UCLASS should
include, increasing curiosity about what will be in the RFP.

The War on the Rocks blog tackled the issue Wednesday. Â Shawn Brimley and Bryan
McGrath - both military analysts with significant experience in Washington
politics -suggested the main concern is that the UCLASS's requirements will aim
"too low" when it comes to lethality. The Navy already has manned and unmanned
aircraft that can perform intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
missions, they argue, including the P-8 Poseidon and E-2D Advance Hawkeye planes
and the MQ-4C Triton and MQ-8C Fire Scout drones.

The two analysts argue that the rise of China's military, among other potential
adversaries, means the United States must prepare to fly into contested
airspace.

"A good example is China's DF-21D missile, one that some analysts term a
game-changing 'carrier-killer' due to its ability to fly beyond the unrefueled
range of a U.S. carrier's strike aircraft," Brimley and McGrath wrote. "Enabling
U.S. aircraft carriers to strike effectively over ranges much larger than the
radius of an adversary's anti-ship missiles is a sine qua non for U.S. maritime
power projection."

Potential contenders for the UCLASS program include Northrop Grumman, which made
the X-47B, as well as three other companies with drones with muscular-sounding
names. They include...

Lockheed Martin's Sea Ghost:

Boeing's Phantom Ray:

... and General Atomics' Sea Avenger

The crazy electronica music on the latter is not included, of course.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


