                             2623 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      February 14, 2014 Friday 8:14 PM EST

Rebooted, but not reimagined

BYLINE: Ann Hornaday

SECTION: ; Pg. T35

LENGTH: 721 words


"RoboCop," the 1987 action satire directed by Paul Verhoeven, was one of the
most cynically ingenious films of its era. It both exploited the aggressive
aesthetic of '80s stars Sylvester Stallone and Arnold Schwarzenegger and subtly
mocked it, all the while delivering prescient observations about Reagan-era
privatization and corporate will to power.

The original "RoboCop" was so good, in fact, that it counts as one of those
films that doesn't need to be remade. On the other hand, at a time when so many
of the futuristic realities it posited have come to pass in the form of
prosthetics, drones and surveillance technology, it couldn't be a better time to
revisit and recast the film's cardinal themes. Like Bob Dylan, James Bond and
"The Tonight Show" host, perhaps every era should get the "RoboCop" it deserves.

In the hands of director Jos√© Padilha ("Bus 174," "Elite Squad"), the "RoboCop"
of today manages to meet expectations without exceeding them. Lightly following
the original story line by screenwriters Edward Neumeier and Michael Miner, this
iteration makes a few tweaks here and there, hewing to the most recognizable
contours but dispensing with the most hard-edged violence and gore. (This
"RoboCop" has been retooled by screenwriter Joshua Zetumer.) Police officer Alex
Murphy is still an upright Detroit cop battling crime on the streets and
corruption inside his precinct; when an explosion takes his life, he is whisked
away by the bright and shiny company OmniCorp and reconfigured as a part-human
cyborg, the perfect melding of man and machine and an ideal marketing tool for
selling Americans on the idea of robotic law enforcement.

The Swedish actor Joel Kinnaman - familiar to some viewers from his starring
role on the AMC series "The Killing" - plays Murphy with convincing melancholy
and conviction. And when the visor comes down on his bionic body armor, his
lower face bears a striking resemblance to Peter Weller, who so memorably
originated the role. Padilha has assembled a supporting cast that conveys both
the gravitas and parodic humor that intertwine through "RoboCop's" singular DNA:
Michael Keaton projects equal parts menace and yuppie blandness as OmniCorp CEO
Raymond Sellars; Gary Oldman is all apologies as Murphy's benevolent Dr.
Frankenstein, Dennett Norton; Abbie Cornish delivers a solemn portrayal of
Murphy's confused wife; and Samuel L. Jackson pops up periodically as a goofy
Greek chorus in the form of a bloviating television pundit.

All of the ingredients are there, and as "RoboCop" opens - with a scene of
OmniCorp robots "pacifying" a neighborhood in Tehran - it looks as if the movie
will locate Murphy within a wider post-9/11 world and globalized economy, a rich
vein for the caustic satire for which the original was known. But with the
exception of a terrific scene in which Murphy tries to escape OmniCorp's testing
facility in China, Padilha ignores that opportunity. Even when the action gets
back to Detroit, he seems more interested in explosive (but largely bloodless)
firefights, heavy ordnance and cool-but-bland visual effects than sharp social
commentary.

Every action movie these days, it seems, has to end up as "Transformers," and
Padilha's "RoboCop" is no exception. The action is incendiary, frantic and,
ultimately, enervating. Fans of the original movie will recognize some of its
best lines (one of which is expertly delivered by Jackie Earl Haley, as an
OmniCorp minion), as well as Murphy classics, wherein he delivers niceties and
beat-cop jargon in a stiff, robotic bark.

For all its playfulness, the new "RoboCop" can't help but lack the novelty of
the original's jolting mixture of dumb-smart irony and visceral pulp. Despite
Kinnaman's sympathetic performance, his 2.6 Billion Dollar Man's existential
dilemma - revolving around the question of whether emotion can override
circuitry and programming - never feels high-stakes. Presumably, "RoboCop," like
its cobbled-together protagonist, is beginning life anew as yet another
franchise. But it does so with much of its potential vaguely unrealized, like
one of Murphy's phantom limbs.

ann.hornaday@washpost.com

PG-13. At area theaters. Contains intense sequences of action, including
frenetic gun violence throughout, brief strong profanity, sensuality and some
drug material. 110 minutes.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


