                              26 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Drones Are Becoming Energy's New Roustabouts

BYLINE: By TODD WOODY

SECTION: Section F; Column 0; Energy; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 971 words


PALO ALTO, Calif. -- THE egg white drone lifted off from its ground station at a
hospital construction site here, hovered for an instant, then zoomed off,
sounding like a five-pound bee as it buzzed around the cranes towering over the
six-acre project.

Capable of carrying a high-resolution camera and other sensors, the quadcopter,
a helicopter with four rotors that resembles a spaceship from a 1950s science
fiction movie, was flying in a demonstration of its ability to serve a
potentially lucrative new market for drones: the energy industry.

Skycatch, a year-old start-up based in San Francisco that has raised $3.2
million from Google and other investors, built the drone. The company has
already signed deals to test its technology with the construction giants Bechtel
and DPR; First Solar, a developer of photovoltaic power plants; and SolarCity, a
solar panel installer. Drones from Skycatch and more established companies are
monitoring power lines, inspecting oil and gas pipelines, checking wind turbines
for defects and pinpointing malfunctioning solar panels.

''Drones can do just about anything the energy companies don't want to send
people to do,'' said Michael Blades, an analyst for the research firm Frost &
Sullivan, who studies the unmanned aerial vehicle, or U.A.V., industry.

The Federal Aviation Administration in 2007 imposed what amounted to a
nationwide no-fly zone on commercial drones in the United States while it wrote
rules regulating their operation, but in March an administrative law judge for
the National Transportation Safety Board ruled that the F.A.A. had no authority
to impose such a ban. The F.A.A. said it expected to issue regulations for the
commercial operation of small drones by the end of this year.

While it is not clear what regulations will eventually emerge, a host of
companies is planning to take to the skies with drones. Amazon has said it plans
to deliver packages with drones, and Google just purchased Titan Aerospace, a
maker of high-altitude drone satellites.

Executives at Aeryon Labs, a Canadian company that made headlines for supplying
drones to rebels in Libya, say energy is a growth area, as sensor-equipped
drones offer a safe, low-cost way to inspect smokestacks, power lines and wind
turbines without having to send workers to scale towers or hiring helicopters,
which can cost thousands of dollars an hour to operate.

''To do a detailed inspection of a tower is very difficult, as it's hard to get
close enough, and of course there's the safety issue,'' said Ian McDonald, an
Aeryon vice president.

Aeryon has dispatched its drones to look for cracks in wind turbine blades,
which can hang hundreds of feet above the ground. BP has deployed Aeryon drones
and thermal cameras in Alaska to scan oil pipelines for hot spots that may
indicate structural weaknesses.

Unlike the large, airplanelike military drones built for combat, commercial
U.A.V.s tend to be small and nimble battery-operated helicopters. The advent of
cheap 3-D printing of drone parts, open-source software and cloud computing has
let start-ups like Skycatch jump in.

For Christian Sanz, Skycatch's chief executive, the energy market is more about
data than drones. A tech industry veteran, he began tinkering with drones,
building his own U.A.V. outfitted with a GoPro camera. He volunteered to fly the
drone over a local construction site and take photos so managers could monitor
the project's progress. Soon he was being deluged with requests.

''It was this massive demand for data that led me to start the business,'' Mr.
Sanz said.

He also realized that potential customers did not want to devote time and
resources to flying drones themselves.

Skycatch drones are designed to operate autonomously. When a drone completes a
mission, it flies back to a ground station, a 100-pound, 2-by-2-foot box with a
circular opening on top. As the drone nears, guided by its camera, G.P.S. and a
sonar sensor, the ground station uses its own sensors and a radio signal to
guide the approach. Once the drone has landed, a robotic arm removes the
battery, which also stores 15 gigabytes of data, and replaces it with a fresh
one from a 10-battery carousel. The data is then beamed up to Box, a cloud
computing service.

Mr. Blades, the analyst, said the companies that succeed would be those that
minimize their costs by developing low-cost U.A.V.s that operate autonomously.

SolarCity, a Silicon Valley company that is one of the nation's largest
installers of solar panels, tested Skycatch's technology last month.

''We're looking at using the U.A.V.s to do operation and maintenance and replace
some of our labor-intensive site-surveying duties,'' said Damien Scott,
SolarCity's vice president for engineering.

Drones may prove particularly useful at detecting malfunctioning solar panels,
which generate a distinctive heat signature as they fail. ''Right now, you would
have to have employees use hand-held devices to find them by making their way
around a large installation,'' Mr. Scott said.

At remote photovoltaic plants in the desert Southwest, solar panels can number
in the hundreds of thousands.

Mr. Sanz said some companies were interested in deploying drones to detect
protected wildlife that may wander onto a wind farm or solar power installation.
''With a U.A.V. flying close to the ground, they can find all these endangered
species that can shut down a project,'' he said, suggesting that a drone could
be used to scare off birds that fly too close to a wind turbine.

Bouygues, the French construction and energy conglomerate, uses operator-flown
drones to inspect power lines but plans to test Skycatch's autonomous system at
a building site in Miami.

''There are cases when you want the drone to be up 24/7,'' said SÃ©bastien
Wickert, an executive for a Bouygues subsidiary in San Jose, Calif.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/22/business/energy-environment/drones
-are-becoming-energys-new-roustabouts.html

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: INSPECTOR GADGET: Vehicles like the Skycatch quadcopter can
locate malfunctioning panels at solar power plants. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTIAN
SANZ/SKYCATCH)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


