                             2781 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 8, 2014 Sunday 2:40 PM EST

'Side Show'

SECTION: ; Pg. A33

LENGTH: 764 words


The Kennedy Center presents a new take on this Broadway musical with help from
director (and Oscar winner) Bill Condon. The story is based on the true tale of
20th-century conjoined twins and vaudeville performers, Daisy and Violet Hilton.
June 14 through July 13. Kennedy Center, Eisenhower Theater, 2700 F St. NW.
202-467-4600. www.kennedy-center.org. $45-$130.

for fairy tales          'Rumpled'

The fairy tale of a troll who turns straw into gold and a princess who accepts
his steep offer gets a new spin in Single Carrot Theatre's interactive staging.
This adaptation centers on a princess named Edith who seeks to excel at fashion.
9:30 a.m. and 11 a.m. June 14. National Theatre, 1321 Pennsylvania Ave. NW.
202-783-3372. www.thenationaldc.org. Free; tickets distributed 30 minutes before
each show, one per person.-

for legends          Willie Nelson with Alison Krauss & Union Station

Willie Nelson turned 81 in late April, and if the Red-Headed Stranger doesn't
quite have the same verve he had a few decades ago, he shows no signs of slowing
down: His new album, "Band of Brothers," will be released next week, while
Nelson is in the midst of a marathon tour with bluegrass star Alison Krauss and
Union Station. 5 p.m. June 14. Merriweather Post Pavilion, 10475 Little Patuxent
Pkwy., Columbia, Md. 410-715-5550. www.merriweathermusic.com. $45-$75.

for video art          'Black Box: Oliver Laric'

In "Versions," the artist uses video to consider how original images have been
co-opted and transformed, thanks to the proliferation of technology. Through
Oct. 5. Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Seventh Street and Independence
Avenue SW. 202-633-1000. hirshhorn.si.edu. Free.

For the bayou           Louisiana Swamp Romp

A slice of the bayou in Virginia, Wolf Trap's Louisiana Swamp Romp features one
of its brassiest lineups in its 25 years. Big Sam's Funky Nation, led by former
Dirty Dozen Brass Band trombonist "Big Sam" Williams, and the Stooges Brass Band
hold down the funky end of jazz, while BeauSoleil avec Michael Doucet represents
the zydeco side of the state. 2 p.m. June 14. Wolf Trap, Filene Center, 1551
Trap Rd., Vienna, Va. 703-255-1900. www.wolftrap.org. $30.- -

for theater          'Grounded'

The solo show comes to Studio Theatre courtesy of London's Gate Theatre. The
play, which got stellar reviews when it played at Edinburgh's Festival Fringe
and in London, follows a fighter pilot, who trades in her plane for an office
where she remotely mans drones. June 10-29. Studio Theatre, 1501 14th St. NW.
www.studiotheatre.org. $39-$49.

for jazz          Nicholas Payton XXX

Grammy-winning trumpeter Nicholas Payton's explorations of what he calls BAM, or
black American music, have included his own takes on Miles Davis's funk and the
classic sounds of New Orleans brass, unburdened by the usual trappings of the
genre. A 2012 visit to Bohemian Caverns resulted in a blistering live album;
let's hope Payton can bottle that lightning in another part of town. 8 and 10
p.m. June 13-14. Blues Alley, 1073 Wisconsin Ave. NW. 202-337-4141.
www.bluesalley.com. $30.

for animated films          'How to Train Your Dragon 2'

Hiccup (voice of Jay Baruchel) reunites with his long-lost mother when he and
his dragon Toothless fly back onto the big screen in this sequel to the 2010
animated film. Opens June 13. Area theaters.- for silent movies 'Chaplin at
Mutual' shorts If you're looking for something more old-school than computer
animation, AFI Silver Theatre screens three silent shorts Charlie Chaplin filmed
for the Mutual Film Corp.: 1917's "The Cure," "The Immigrant" and "The
Adventurer" - with live musical accompaniment. 3:30 p.m. June 14. AFI Silver
Theatre, 8633 Colesville Rd., Silver Spring, Md. 301-495-6720.
www.afi.com/silver. $12.

for new musicals          'Cloak and Dagger'

This world-premiere musical mystery by Ed Dixon parodies old film noir with four
actors playing 20 characters. June 12 through July 6. Signature Theatre, 4200
Campbell Ave., Arlington, Va. 703-820-9771. www.signature-theatre.org. $29-$98.

for history          'Star-Spangled Banner' Manuscript

In honor of the 200th anniversary of Francis Scott Key's "Star-Spangled Banner,"
the American History Museum is putting the original manuscript on view. June
14-July 6. National Museum of American History, 1400 Constitution Ave. NW.
202-633-1000. americanhistory.si.edu.

- Going Out Guide staff

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


