                             287 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                             June 24, 2014 Tuesday

Readers Divided on the Legality of Drone Strikes

BYLINE: DAVID FIRESTONE

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 611 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Many commenters are fine with the killing of Anwar al-Awlaki, an
American citizen.


For many readers who commented on our editorial this morning about the legal
underpinning of a fatal drone strike, the issue is an easy one: Anwar al-Awlaki
may have been an American citizen, but he was obviously a terrorist, because he
had aligned himself with a branch of Al Qaeda. Thus the United States was right
in 2011 to kill him (and his son) in a drone strike in Yemen.

"I pay my Government to protect me," wrote Dave, of Atlanta. "If the President
of the United States says a person needs to be killed by some means in order to
protect me, then he or she has my support at every turn."

A reader calling himself Southern Boy, of Spring Hill, Tenn., said Mr. Awlaki
was an "accidental American," because he owed his first allegiance to Islam and
Yemen."As far as I'm concerned, his demise at the tip of a guided missile was
just rewards for failing to appreciate what it means to be an American, to turn
his back on the land of his birth, and wage a cowardly proxy war against it
through surrogates like Major Nadal and the Nigerian underwear bomber," he
wrote. "May he rest in peace."

And, with maximum snark, James of Washington, D.C., issued the criticism most
commonly aimed at all meddling civil libertarians: "Better a thousand Americans
die than a single terrorist have his due process rights compromised."

Those due process rights, however, are worth getting exercised about. The Times
has frequently editorialized in support of the basic principle that the United
States cannot kill people off the battlefield without following international
law, which limits such actions to a last-resort effort to prevent imminent harm.
In the case of American citizens, some sort of due process should be required
before they are put on a kill list, and the editorial said that the legal
justification for Mr. Awlaki's killing, as described in a newly released memo,
was inadequate.

Many readers did agree with our position, and criticized other commentators for
ignoring the hard questions. Rob Porter, of Pennsylvania, said the easy
condemnations of Mr. Awlaki missed the point.

"That point being, how do you know he was bad (i.e., guilty)?" he wrote. "If
your only answer is, 'the president and the newspapers said so,' then we all
have a problem."

Fred, from Baltimore, said he was disappointed in President Obama because of
this issue, even though he supported the president's election. "Even people
charged with treason are entitled to due process, not summary execution via air
strike," he wrote, adding: "This is wrong. You don't pick and choose when to
uphold and defend the Constitution."

A large number of readers said The Times had actually gone too easy on the
administration. Why was the editorial only concerned with the due process rights
of American citizens, some asked, when the government was using drones to kill
people around the world? (In those cases, there is no legal obligation to
provide due process, but the government does have to follow basic principles of
international law, which require capture rather than killing, if feasible.) And
many disagreed with the editorial's suggestion that an independent arbiter like
the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court approve suggested targets , saying
the secret court was little more than a rubber stamp for the administration.

"No confidence in them, thank you very much!" wrote Sophia, of Bangor, Maine.
"There must be a better way. We are creating more jihadists with every strike.
And how long before other countries start using weaponized drones and killing
people they deem terrorists? Why do we think we are the only ones capable of
doing this? Drones need to be stopped and stopped NOW."

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


