                             2846 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       July 27, 2014 Sunday 11:43 PM EST

U.S. evacuates embassy in Libya, citing militia violence

BYLINE: Ernesto Londo√±o;Anne Gearan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 759 words


The State Department on Saturday evacuated all U.S. personnel from its embassy
in Libya after clashes among rival militias in the capital intensified in recent
days in the vicinity of the diplomatic mission, officials said.

Traveling in Paris, Secretary of State John F. Kerry cited the threat posed by
"freewheeling militia violence" near the embassy in Tripoli. Kerry said some
embassy functions will continue from neighboring Tunisia, where diplomats were
taken.

"We will return the moment the security situation permits us to," Kerry said.

The evacuation of diplomats and other government personnel by land lasted five
hours and was carried out with U.S. military aircraft providing security from
the air, officials said. The decision was not made lightly, the State Department
said.

"Security has to come first," spokeswoman Marie Harf said in a statement.
"Regrettably, we had to take this step because the location of our embassy is in
very close proximity to intense fighting and ongoing violence between armed
Libyan factions."

When U.S. diplomats evacuate a diplomatic post, they must smash computers and
other sensitive equipment that could be exploited for intelligence purposes.

The State Department also issued a new travel warning for U.S. citizens,
advising against all travel to the country and recommending that Americans in
Libya leave now.

"The security situation in Libya remains unpredictable and unstable," the
department said in its warning notice. "The Libyan government has not been able
to adequately build its military and police forces and improve security
following the 2011 revolution."

Saturday's closure of the embassy in Tripoli marked the second time the State
Department has shuttered its Libya mission since 2011, when U.S. personnel left
as the country's civil war broke out.

The decision was rich in symbolism, coming less than two years after militants
in the eastern city of Benghazi stormed two U.S. government compounds, killing
the American ambassador, J. Christopher Stevens, and three of his colleagues.

Since that attack, which ignited a political firestorm, the Obama administration
has bolstered security measures for its diplomats in Libya and has sought to
take steps to stabilize the oil-rich nation reeling from decades of despotic
rule.

The evacuation drew a mixed response from Rep. Edward R.  Royce (R-Calif.),
chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, who said it "seems like the
right call" given the chaotic security situation in Libya, but added that it
also reflected a lack of direction on the administration's part.

"Our diplomatic absence will make the hard task of achieving political stability
in Libya even harder," Royce said.

In the State Department statement, Harf characterized the evacuation as
"temporary" but provided no time frame for a possible return.

Rear Adm. John Kirby, a Pentagon spokesman, said the U.S. military provided F-16
planes, surveillance aircraft and an airborne response force with MV-22 Osprey
aircraft.

"The mission was conducted without incident," he said.

In recent weeks, fighting has spread to Tripoli's airport, compromising the
easiest evacuation route for U.S. personnel. The U.S. ambassador in Tripoli,
Deborah K. Jones, conveyed on Twitter how tenuous the security situation has
become in recent days.

"Heavy shelling and other exchanges in our Abu Salim neighborhood this morning,"
she wrote last Sunday. Using an Arabic term that means "thanks to God," she
added: "Alhamdullila all safe."

Later in the week, she sought to dispel a rumor suggesting that the United
States was flying armed drones over Libya. "We are not engaged in this fighting,
just trying to stay safe under fire," she wrote.

The U.S.-dominated NATO military campaign that enabled rebels to oust longtime
Libyan leader Moammar Gaddafi in the summer of 2011 was initially hailed as a
foreign policy victory for the Obama administration. As the country has
descended into chaos, and Islamist militant groups have taken root in the east,
Libya has become among the most complex challenges in the region for Washington
and its allies.

Officials said the United States remains committed to helping Libya.

"We will continue to engage all Libyans and the international community to seek
a peaceful resolution to the current conflict and to advance Libya's democratic
transition," Harf said. "We reiterate that Libyans must immediately cease
hostilities and begin negotiations to resolve their grievances."

ernesto.londono@washpost.com

anne.gearan@washpost.com

Gearan reported from Paris.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


