                             280 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 13, 2014 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

Pakistan gave U.S. approval for 2 drone strikes, o√¢[#x2c6][#x17e]cials say

BYLINE: Mehreen Zahra-Malik;Haji Mujtaba

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 509 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - Two top Pakistani officials said their government had
given U.S. authorities approval for a pair of deadly U.S. drone strikes, the
first such raids by unmanned CIA aircraft in this country in six months.

The drones fired missiles at Pakistani Taliban hideouts Wednesday and early
Thursday, killing at least 10 militants, in a strike that came in response to a
bloody attack on a Karachi airport this week, officials said Thursday.

Underlining Pakistan's alarm over the brazen Taliban attack on the airport, the
officials told the Reuters news agency that a "jointPakistan-U.S. operation" had
been ordered to hit the insurgents.

Another official said Pakistan had asked the United States for help after the
Sunday attack on the country's busiest airport, and would be intensifying
airstrikes on militant hideouts in the coming days.

Pakistan publicly opposes U.S. drone strikes, saying they kill too many
civilians and violate its sovereignty, although in private, officials have
admitted the government supports them.

"The attacks were launched with the express approval of the Pakistan government
and army," said a top government official, speaking on the condition of
anonymity because  he was not authorized to discuss the issue with the media.

"It is now policy that the Americans will not use drones without permission from
the security establishment here. There will be complete coordination and
Pakistan will be in the loop," the official said.

"We understand that drones will be an important part of our fight against the
Taliban now," he added.

The strikes were the first in the nuclear-armed South Asian nation since an
attack in December in which three suspected militants were killed. The CIA
conducts covert drone operations against terrorism suspects.

Speculation has been rising that Pakistan is preparing for a full-scale military
operation in North Waziristan, a scenario that Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif has
resisted for months in favor of a negotiated end to the insurgency.

But talks with the Taliban have collapsed many times since Sharif announced his
plan in February, mainly over Taliban demands that the government withdraw all
troops from tribal areas and impose sharia law.

Pakistan military sources said six militants including four Uzbeks were killed
in the first strike on Wednesday about three miles north of Miran Shah, the
capital of the North Waziristan tribal region where Taliban insurgents are holed
up.

The second attack killed four militants in the same area about 2 a.m. Thursday.

Another source, a senior member of the Afghan Taliban, put the death toll at 16,
with 10 killed in the second strike.

The Afghan Taliban commander said all 10 militants killed in the second strike
were affiliated with the Haqqani network, which regularly launches attacks on
Western forces in Afghanistan and which until last month held U.S. soldier Bowe
Bergdahl.

The Pakistani Taliban is allied with the Afghan militants of the same name, but
they operate as a separate entity, focused on toppling the Pakistani state.

- Reuters

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


