                             299 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 2, 2013 Monday 8:13 PM EST

BYLINE: Timothy B. Lee

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 304 words


Amazon box by drone?

Jeffrey P. Bezos has never been known for thinking small. And in an interview
aired Sunday on CBS's "60 Minutes," he outlined his latest plan for
revolutionizing the retail industry: using drones to deliver packages in as
little as 30 minutes. Declaring himself an "optimist," the Amazon.com founder
and chief executive predicted the technology could be brought to market in as
little as five years.

This is more than a theoretical idea. Bezos showed CBS's Charlie Rose a working
prototype of an eight-rotor helicopter drone called an "octocopter." Emblazoned
with "Amazon Prime Air," the flying robot has a claw at the bottom that allows
it to scoop up packages at Amazon fulfillment centers and carry them to
customers' front lawns.

Ryan Calo, a law professor at the University of Washington who has written
extensively about drones, said this is precisely the kind of application
Congress had in mind in 2012 when it ordered the Federal Aviation Administration
to open the sky to commercial drones. There are strict limits on the use of
drones for commercial purposes, but that is scheduled to change soon.

"By 2015, the FAA has to come up with a set of rules that integrates just the
kind of thing that Amazon is talking about" into the national airspace, Calo
said.

Amazon will have to convince federal regulators that the technology is safe and
that it wouldn't lead to excessive congestion. "If what Amazon proposes doesn't
feel safe, the FAA could get worried about the prospect of these things falling
out of the sky," Calo said. In his "60 Minutes" interview, Bezos said that the
prototype octocopter has redundant motors so it can stay in the air even if one
fails.

Disclosure: Bezos owns The Washington Post.

- Timothy B. Lee

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


