                              29 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                            April 9, 2014 Wednesday

Artists Try to Prick Conscience of Drone Operators With Giant Portrait of Orphan
in Pakistani Field

BYLINE: ROBERT MACKEY

LENGTH: 1823 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â A group of rights activists and artists started a campaign this week,
&#8220;Not a Bug Splat,&#8221; which seeks to draw attention to the human cost
of American drone strikes in Pakistan, and to communicate directly with the
pilots who guide the bombers to their targets by remote control.


While a series of deadly bombings in Pakistan this week threatens to undermine
peace talks between the government and the Taliban, a group of rights activists
and artists have started a campaign to draw attention to the human cost of
another sort of violence - American drone strikes aimed at militants, which have
reportedly killed hundreds of civilians in recent years.

The centerpiece of the "Not a Bug Splat" campaign is a photograph of a child
reportedly orphaned in one attack, which was made into an enormous poster and
installed in a field in Pakistan to stare up at the pilots who operate the
unmanned aerial vehicles by remote control. The project - which is the work of
Pakistanis, Americans and the French street artist JR - takes its name from a
piece of military software that generates computer models of the destruction a
bombing raid might cause. When projected onto overhead images, those models are
said to look something like the remains of a squashed insect on a windshield.

The art project is described as an attempt to counter the dehumanizing
implications of that metaphor. "Humans appear as disposable bugs when viewed
through a traditional drone camera," the group writes next to an overhead image
on its website. "We changed this. Now, a drone will see an actual face of a
child, creating dialogue and, possibly, empathy."

One of the activists, Akash Goel, told The Lede in an interview that the poster
was made from a photograph first published by Wired in 2010, of a young girl
whose parents and brother were killed in a drone strike near the Afghan border
on Aug. 21, 2009. The photograph was taken  in the North Waziristan village of
Dande Darpa Khel by a photographer from the region, Noor Behram, who works to
document the impact of drone strikes by photographing children orphaned or
killed in the attacks. (His images have been distributed by the British legal
charity Reprieve.)

The missiles used in that 2009 strike killed 12 people, including women and
children, when they struck a compound near an Islamic school set up by
Jalaluddin Haqqani, an Afghan fighter and senior Taliban member, Pakistani
officials told my colleagues Pir Zubair Shah and Lydia Polgreen at the time.

Another spokesman for the collective, Saks Afridi - a Pakistani-American
creative director in New York - said that the project was part of the artist
JR's "Inside Out Project," a series of large-scale photographs installed in
public settings around the globe, supported by a $1 million grant from the TED
foundation, awarded in 2011.

Although the poster was installed in Pakistan's Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province by
Pakistani artists, Dr. Goel - an Indian-American physician in New York who has
worked for the Clinton Foundation - said that the group wanted to draw attention
to what it saw as a global problem, the dehumanizing effect of the United States
war by remote control, rather than a regional one. Asked what message the group
hoped to send to the drone pilots, Dr. Goel said, simply, "This isn't a video
game."

He also said that data compiled by the New America Foundation and the Bureau of
Investigative Journalism suggested that only about 2 percent of those killed by
the C.I.A. in Pakistan were high-profile militants targeted in the attacks.
Noting that estimates of the total number of deaths varied from about 1,500 to
more than 3,500, Dr. Goel added: "It is morally reprehensible that we don't even
know who they are, how many there are."

Images posted on Instagram by Insiya Syed, a Pakistani photojournalist, showed
her traveling with some of the "creative masters" behind the project, and
curious onlookers watching the installation near the town of Swabi in
Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa on March 28.

As a challenge to the dehumanizing effect of aerial bombardment, the project
also evokes a famous scene from the 1949 film "The Third Man," in which a war
profiteer is asked, "Have you ever seen any of your victims?" Looking down at
the world from the heights of the Wiener Riesenrad, the character played by
Orson Welles says: "Look down there. Would you really feel any pity if one of
those dots stopped moving forever? If I offered you 20,000 pounds for every dot
that stopped, would you really, old man, tell me to keep my money, or would you
calculate how many dots you could afford to spare?"

The dramatic campaign met with enthusiastic support in many parts of the world,
and was praised in Pakistan by the former cricket star Imran Khan and supporters
of his Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party, which has advocated talks with the
Taliban and suggested that drone strikes are to blame for Islamist militancy in
the region.

PTI's sustained campaign against drone attacks gets increasing global support
from UN to int artists. Latest is campaign #NotABugSplat.

- Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI)7 Apr 14

Poster placed on the ground to STARE BACK AT DRONE Operators - This child is NO
LONGER A BUG SPLAT #NotABugSplat http://t.co/OXYSJy2ZIa

- Awab Alvi (@DrAwab)6 Apr 14

Critics of Mr. Khan's party, including Pakistanis who complain of what they call
a policy of appeasement of Islamist militants by the government, called the
project's focus on foreign drones a distraction from the larger problem of
domestic terrorism. In messages posted on social networks using the
#NotABugSplat tag, the skeptics pointed out that while no drone attacks have
taken place for more than 100 days, as the government pursues peace talks - and
no civilian casualties have been reported in more than a year - the mass killing
of civilians and targeted attacks on politicians and journalists who criticize
the Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan, or T.T.P., has continued unabated.

2014: No US drone strike for 100 days in #Pakistan. 551 civilians & 183 security
ppl die due to terrorism in same 100 days #NotABugSplat

- Fifi Haroon (@fifiharoon)6 Apr 14

Obama pursued a horrific drone campaign that killed 1500 Pakistanis, the TTP
launched a horrific campaign that killed  25,000.

- Fifi Haroon (@fifiharoon)7 Apr 14

#NotABugSplat: Protesting drone attacks that aren't happening, fueling excuses
for terrorist attacks that are.

- New Pakistan (@newpakistan)7 Apr 14

Hundreds of Shia citizens, #KilledByCrazies #NotABugSplat

- Poppy Afzal Khan (@poppyafzalkhan)7 Apr 14

Hundreds of Ahmadi citizens of Pakistan #KilledByCrazies #NotABugSplat

- Poppy Afzal Khan (@poppyafzalkhan)7 Apr 14

@salmantaseer #NotABugSplat #KilledByCrazies

- Poppy Afzal Khan (@poppyafzalkhan)7 Apr 14

Mustafa, @Razarumi's dead driver #NotABugSplat #KilledByTerrorists

- Poppy Afzal Khan (@poppyafzalkhan)7 Apr 14

Malala shot in the head. By the Taliban. #NotABugSplat

- GodHatesFAQs ([#x1f04][#x3b8][#x3b5]\xCE[#x3c2]) (@MrPolyatheist)7 Apr 14

So, for those who may be missing my point, those killed by crazy terrorists are
also #NotABugSplat any more than innocents killed by drones

- Poppy Afzal Khan (@poppyafzalkhan)7 Apr 14

The spokesmen for the project stressed that it had been in the works for a year,
and so was not tied to the current lull in strikes. They also noted that the
C.I.A. drone war appears to have been paused rather than halted for good in
Pakistan. Indeed, as my colleague Mark Mazzetti reported earlier this week,
"American officials said that the drone program there could continue for years."

In a follow-up email, Dr. Goel explicitly denied that the campaign had any
partisan political aims. "This project is by no means anti-American, anti-U.S.
foreign policy, or even anti-drone," he wrote. "Our project is specifically a
peaceful way for us to humanize the issue. We wanted to bring an awareness and
sensitivity to the civilian casualties and collateral damage of the bombings. We
have absolutely no political affiliation or political agenda other than
promoting peace in the region."

Pakistani critics of the project also pointed out that it is not accurate to say
that "drone attacks regularly occur" in the region where the poster was
installed. When a senior member of the Haqqani network was killed in a strike in
the province last November, Agence France-Presse reported that it was "the first
time a U.S. drone hit a district inside Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa."

Another aspect of the campaign that is open to question is the assertion, in the
project description, that "Predator drone operators often refer to kills as 'bug
splats,' since viewing the body through a grainy video image gives the sense of
an insect being crushed." Asked for a source for that information, Dr. Goel
cited a Rolling Stone report on drone warfare published in 2012. In that
article, Michael Hastings wrote:

For a new generation of young guns, the experience of piloting a drone is not
unlike the video games they grew up on. Unlike traditional pilots, who
physically fly their payloads to a target, drone operators kill at the touch of
a button, without ever leaving their base - a remove that only serves to further
desensitize the taking of human life. (The military slang for a man killed by a
drone strike is "bug splat," since viewing the body through a grainy-green video
image gives the sense of an insect being crushed.)

Mr. Hastings, who died last year, did not cite a source. According to a 2003
report from the Washington Post, however, Blugsplat was the name of a computer
program that "generates bloblike images - resembling squashed insects - that
military officials say more precisely model potential damage by a particular
type and size of bomb dropped by a particular aircraft flying at a given
altitude."

In 2011, the Washington Post correspondent Walter Pincus reported that a former
C.I.A. director, Michael Hayden, had used the term during a conference in
Washington. Mr. Hayden, the Post reported,

described how, with a Predator circling overhead, those involved in ordering use
of its missiles from thousands of miles away can call up computer maps that show
the potential effects of each weapon. Before any of the Hellfire missiles are
launched, he said, the backup team asks for the "the bug splat" of the attack -
a readout of the impact the missile would have on its ground target.

Micah Zenko, the author of the Council on Foreign Relations report "Reforming
U.S. Drone Strike Policies," told The Lede that the term bug splat is indeed
used by officials in the military and C.I.A. who chose targets for bombardment
to describe not the appearance of a person killed in an attack but what the
projected damage looks like. In an email, Mr. Zenko wrote that the term "refers
to the collateral damage estimation methodology process that occurs before a
weapons release is authorized. For drone strikes, they will routinely do several
of them, which can show very different 'splats' depending on the type of weapon,
the type of warhead, and which direction it is fired from."


     Â·    Pakistanis Explain What the Election Means to Them
     Â·    Pakistani Activist, 15, Is Shot by Taliban
     Â·    Pakistani Soldiers Died Near Long-Disputed Border
     Â·    Pakistan's British-Drawn Borders
     Â·    The Aftermath of Drone Strikes on a Wedding Convoy in Yemen


LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


