                             2919 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     September 19, 2014 Friday 12:25 AM EST

A misfire for the mainstream

BYLINE: Michael O'Sullivan

SECTION: ; Pg. T36

LENGTH: 746 words


It's hard to describe "Tusk" in a way that fully captures its unapologetically
demented weirdness, but I'll try. Something of a departure even for
writer-director Kevin Smith - whose burgeoning oeuvre now spans sex farce,
horror, romance, fantasy and documentary - the film is a hybrid of fairy tale,
gothic horror, psychological thriller and comedy. It's the saga of a Canadian
lunatic who lures an American traveler into his home and then imprisons him for
the purpose of transforming the man, surgically, into a walrus.

If you think it sounds like "The Human Centipede," minus the coprophagia and
with a few more laughs, you're not far off.

Although I detected some gleeful snickering coming from one or two members of
the invited audience at a recent press screening (which, given the demographics
of the movie-reviewing population, may have included some actual psychopaths),
the louder reaction seemed to be a deafening stunned silence.

The hush was nice because it allowed me to drift off from time to time, without
distraction, during the film's draggier bits.

Did I say draggy? Once the outlandish premise is established - and this occurs
fairly early on - the movie is an exercise in foregone conclusions. As
unimaginable as it may sound on paper, the story of one man (Michael Parks)
turning another (Justin Long) into a 4,000-pound marine mammal plays out pretty
much exactly like it sounds. First the legs are amputated and fused into a tail,
then the arms are wrenched into rudimentary flippers, tusks are implanted in the
jaw and the scarred torso is filled with - I'm not quite sure what. Maybe
chicken fat, maybe 100 percent goose down, creating something that looks like a
cross between a flesh comforter and a Snuggie made of human skin.

Toss the man a raw mackerel and let's get on with it.

Only the cameo appearance of an uncredited Johnny Depp, playing a French
Canadian detective with a ludicrously broad accent, was sufficient to rouse me,
briefly, from the torpor induced by listening to Parks. For much of the film,
the actor drones on about how his character, Howard Howe, fell in love (or
something) with a walrus that had saved his life. As mesmerizing a raconteur as
Parks is - and he's absolutely the best thing about "Tusk" - the actor
ultimately turns the film into a bedtime story with his soporific delivery.

Much of the film features Howe regaling Long's Wallace Bryton - a Los Angeles
comedy podcaster who collects tales of the bizarre from around the world - with
a shaggy-walrus tale that's meant to explain his pinniped obsession. Despite
some flashback scenes, none of this is especially cinematic. This is
unsurprising, considering that Smith's film is based on "The Walrus and the
Carpenter," a 2013 podcast that the filmmaker created with collaborator Scott
Mosier for their omnivorous dissection of pop culture, Smodcast.

There's something about "Tusk" that feels like it would work better as old-
fashioned radio. What dazzles the mind's eye - or the ear - comes across as
disappointingly literal on celluloid.

All that being said, I have no doubt that there is an audience for "Tusk." On
his way out of the theater, one critic compared it, not unfavorably, to Tod
Browning's masterpiece "Freaks."

The comparison is not entirely inapt. But where Browning's 1932 film about
circus freaks was actually about something - the loneliness of outsiders and the
monstrousness of so-called normal people - "Tusk" seems to harbor no grander
ambitions than to create a gross-out gag. It leaves us with the indelible image
of a man in a walrus suit, but it's really something much slighter: monkeyshines
dressed up like a movie.

michael.osullivan@washpost.com

Â½

R. At area theaters. Contains violent and disturbing imagery, some gore, crude
language and sexual content. 102 minutes.

BioPage
http://www.www.washingtonpost.com/people/michael-osullivan
Description             Once the outlandish premise is established - and this
occurs fairly early on - the movie is an exercise in foregone conclusions.
Movie Name             Tusk                                 Movie Website
http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3099498/?ref_=nv_sr_1
Stars for this movie             1.5

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


