                             2901 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     September 7, 2014 Sunday 11:04 PM EST

Washington theater fall preview

SECTION: ; Pg. E06

LENGTH: 2851 words


3Critics' recommendations are indicated by arrows. Access our interactive
listings to find the latest showtimes, venue information and more events at
www.washingtonpost.com/goingoutguide.

OPEN

"Belleville."A married American couple living in France confront the
imperfections in their relationship. At Studio Theatre. Through Oct. 12.

"Colossal."Andrew Hinderaker's new play tells the story of a college football
player left paralyzed by the game he loves. At Olney Theatre Center. Through
Sept. 28.

"Dirty Dancing - the Classic Story on Stage."Over the course of a summer,
dancing brings together two lovers from different worlds. At National Theatre.
Through Sept. 14.

"Fool for Love."Two lovers grapple with jealousy and betrayal. At Round House
Theatre. Through Sept. 27.

"King Lear."Joseph Marcell stars in Shakespeare's Globe's staging of the Bard's
tragedy in which a weary king gives up his duties and goes mad. At Folger
Theatre. Through Sept. 21.

"Molly."Playwright John Millington Synge's lover, Molly Allgood, is the subject
of Scena's world premiere. At Atlas Performing Arts Center. Through Sept. 21.

"She Kills Monsters."In this comedy staged by Rorschach Theatre, a woman relives
the adventures of her dead teenage sister by reading through her Dungeons &
Dragons notebook. At Atlas Performing Arts Center. Through Sept. 14.

"Shining City."In Scena's staging of Conor McPherson's play, a therapist's first
patient might be haunted by his wife's ghost. At Atlas Performing Arts Center.
Through Sept. 21.

"Spark."Theater Alliance's world premiere follows a veteran as she acclimates to
her life after war. At Anacostia Playhouse. Through Sept. 28.

"Sunday in the Park with George."Georges Seurat's painting "A Sunday Afternoon
on the Island of La Grande Jatte" provided the inspiration for Stephen Sondheim
and James Lapine's play. At Signature Theatre. Through Sept. 21.

3 "The Shoplifters."The world premiere comedy follows a senior with a stealing
problem. At Arena Stage. Through Oct. 19.

"The Understudy."An understudy struggles with backstage drama. At Everyman
Theatre. Through Sept. 28.

"Yentl."A girl dresses as a man in order to study Jewish writings. Her plan
backfires when she falls in love. At Theater J. Through Oct. 5.

SEPTEMBER

10 "Amadeus."Composer Antonio Salieri struggles with his legacy as the
up-and-coming Mozart steals his spotlight. At Center Stage. Through Oct. 12.

10 "Fatal Song - the Great Opera Murders."In the In Series show, opera heroines
lampoon the genre's death scenes. At Source. Through Sept. 21.

10 "Metamorphosis."Kafka's work about a man-turned-insect is given a musical
twist by the Alliance for New Music-Theatre as part of the Embassy of the Czech
Republic's Mutual Inspirations Festival. At Woolly Mammoth Theatre. Through
Sept. 21.

10 "Seven Guitars."In August Wilson's play staged by No Rules Theatre Company, a
blues singer with a second chance at a music career is murdered shortly after
being released from jail. At Signature Theatre. Through Sept. 28.

11 "Cancun."The comedy follows two vacationing couples contemplating what their
life would have been like had they married different people. At Gala Hispanic
Theatre. Through Oct. 5.

11 "The Devil in His Own Words."The Devil is profiled using writings from across
time and geography as Taffety Punk revisits its first show. At Capitol Hill Arts
Workshop. Through Oct. 4.

11 "Toast."The audience helps a group of inventors create a new innovation in
Dog & Pony D.C.'s show. At Clarice Smith Performing Arts Center. Through Sept.
14.

11 "Too Much Light Makes the Baby Go Blind."The Neo-Futurists stage 30 plays in
an hour. At Clarice Smith Performing Arts Center, Dance Theatre. Through Sept.
12.

12 "The Magic Flute - Impempe Yomlingo."South Africa's Isango Ensemble sets
Mozart's opera in modern-day South African townships. At Lansburgh Theatre.
Through Sept. 21.

12 "Take Me Out."When a baseball player publicly announces that he is gay it
sets off a far-reaching chain of reaction. At 1st Stage. Through Oct. 12.

13 "A Commedia Romeo and Juliet."Faction of Fools takes on Shakespeare's
tragedy. At Elstad Auditorium at Gallaudet University. Through Sept. 14.

13 "Pinocchio!"Faction of Fools stages its twist on the story of a puppet who
becomes a real boy. At Elstad Auditorium at Gallaudet University. Through Sept.
20.

13 "Venus and Adonis."The Isango Ensemble puts a South African and multilingual
twist on Shakespeare's romantic poem. At Lansburgh Theatre. Through Sept. 20.

17 "Marie Antoinette."David Adjmi's play, which puts a contemporary spin on the
story of the queen of France, gets its area premiere. At Woolly Mammoth Theatre.
Through Oct. 12.

17 "Three Sistahs."Chekhov's "Three Sisters" provides inspiration for the
musical about three women contemplating their past, present and future. At
MetroStage. Through Nov. 2.

17 "To Kill a Mockingbird."National Players present Harper Lee's story of the
pursuit of justice in a Southern town. At Olney Theatre Center. Through Sept.
28.

19 "God of Carnage."A fight between two boys sends their usually well-mannered
parents into a battle of their own. At Silver Spring Stage. Through Oct. 11.

19 "Stuart Little."A New York City mouse raised by a human family ventures
outside in search of his best friend. At Glen Echo Park, Adventure Theatre MTC.
Through Oct. 26.

20 "Broadway's Next Hit Musical."Audience input helps the cast develop a new
musical. At Hylton Performing Arts Center.

20 "The Intergalactic Nemesis: Robot Planet Rising."The show is a follow-up to
the May 2013 "The Intergalactic Nemesis: A Live-Action Graphic Novel," which
appeared at the Kennedy Center. At Artisphere. Through Sept. 21.

20 "The Seven Year Itch." A husband struggling with a midlife crisis is the
subject of George Axelrod's comedy presented by American Century Theater. At
Gunston Arts Center Theater II. Through Oct. 11.

24 "Awake and Sing!"The 1935 comic drama by Clifford Odets follows a Brooklyn
family struggling through the Great Depression. At Olney Theatre Center. Through
Oct. 19.

26 "Driving Miss Daisy."Nancy Robinette and Craig Wallace star in the Pulitzer
Prize-winning story about the decades-long relationship between an aging woman
and her black driver, beginning in 1948, in Atlanta. At Ford's Theatre. Through
Oct. 26.

27 "The Night Fairy."An injured fairy must learn to survive in the daylight
while her wings grow back. At Imagination Stage. Through Oct. 26.

27 "Patti Lupone: Coulda, Woulda, Shoulda . . . Played That Part."The Tony and
Grammy Award-winning actress performs songs from throughout her career. At
George Mason University, Center for the Arts Concert Hall.

27 "Stellaluna."A young bat attempts to fit in among her adopted bird family
until she discovers that the abilities that make her different enable her to
thrive at night. At Maryland Ensemble Theatre. Through Oct. 26.

3 27 "The Tiny House Plays."Three small houses in Northeast Washington provide
the settings for five site-specific plays presented by Pinky Swear Productions
and Boneyard Studios. Through Oct. 12.

30 "Evita."The musical follows the rise of one woman from poverty to the first
lady of Argentina. At Kennedy Center, Opera House. Through Oct. 19.

OCTOBER

1 "The Island of Dr. Moreau."Paata Tsikurishvili directs and stars in H.G.
Wells's story about a group that winds up on an island run by Dr. Moreau and
overrun by his experiments. At Synetic Theater. Through Nov. 2.

37 "Elmer Gantry."A broke salesman becomes a popular preacher after being
attracted to an earnest evangelist. At Signature Theatre. Through Nov. 9.

8 "Next to Normal."The musical explores the effect mental illness has on one
suburban family. At Center Stage. Through Nov. 16.

8 "The Taming of the Shrew."Pallas Theatre Collective sets Shakespeare's
romantic comedy in 20th-century Louisiana. At Anacostia Arts Center. Through
Oct. 26.

9 "Absolutely! {Perhaps}."In Constellation Theatre Company's comedy, rumors fly
among the residents of an Italian village when a new couple becomes their
neighbor. At Source. Through Nov. 9.

10 "Big Nate the Musical."Adventure Theatre MTC gives Lincoln Peirce's cartoon
strip about an average sixth-grader a turn on the stage. At Olney Theatre
Center. Through Oct. 12.

10 "Fetch Clay, Make Man."The play explores the friendship between Muhammad Ali
and Hollywood star Stepin Fetchit and their places in the Civil Rights Movement.
At Round House Theatre. Through Nov. 2.

13 "Â¡Tum Tica!: Una Historia de Musica y Familia."A boy learns about his
Colombian roots during a trip with his grandfather. At Gala Hispanic Theatre.
Through Oct. 25.

14 "Do-Gooders Gone Bad: Stories About Trying To Do the Right Thing, But Getting
It Wrong."SpeakeasyDC hosts a night of storytelling. At Town Danceboutique.

14 "Sex With Strangers."An unlikely couple struggles with what to do after a
one-night stand becomes complicated by the Internet. At Signature Theatre.
Through Dec. 7.

15 "Grounded."The solo show follows a pilot who goes from flying fighter planes
to flying drones when she becomes pregnant. At Everyman Theatre. Through Nov.
16.

315 "The Wolfe Twins."Things don't going according to plan when two siblings
travel to Rome in hopes of restoring their relationship. At Studio Theatre.
Through Nov. 2.

18 "La Vida Breve (the Short Life)."The In Series's Gypsy opera depicts a
relationship between a woman and her lover. At Source. Through Nov. 1.

21 "Our War."Playwrights and famous Washingtonians, including Justice Ruth Bader
Ginsberg and Eleanor Holmes Norton, reflect on the ongoing impact of the Civil
War. At Arena Stage. Through Nov. 9.

21 "Signature Sisters."The cabaret puts a modern touch on the swing music of the
Andrews Sisters. At Signature Theatre. Through Oct. 25.

21 "Visible Language."WSC Avant Bard gives the bilingual musical about a pivotal
time in deaf culture its world premiere. At Theatre on the Run. Through Nov. 16.

21 "Wordless!"Artist Art Spiegelman teams up with musician Phillip Johnston to
explore the history of graphic novels, cartoons and illustrations. At George
Washington University, Lisner Auditorium.

325 "Little Dancer."Edgar Degas' sculpture, "Little Dancer Aged Fourteen," which
is on view at the National Gallery of Art, provided the inspiration for this
world premiere musical. At Kennedy Center, Eisenhower Theater. Through Nov. 30.

328 "As You Like It."Director Michael Attenborough makes his regional debut with
Shakespeare's romantic comedy. At Lansburgh Theatre. Through Dec. 7.

28 "Julius Caesar."Shakespeare's tragedy about the assassinated Roman dictator
is staged. At Folger Theatre. Through Dec. 7.

30 "Boom."The comedy tackles sex and larger existential questions. At Georgetown
University, Walsh Black Box Theatre. Through Nov. 8.

330 "How We Got On."In the regional premiere presented by Forum Theatre, three
suburban kids come of age to a late '80s rap soundtrack. At Silver Spring Black
Box Theatre. Through Nov. 23.

31 Faith Prince.The Tony Award winner performs as part of the series curated by
Barbara Cook. At Kennedy Center, Terrace Theater.

31 "Fiddler on the Roof."The musical about a Jewish man who attempts to instill
his faith in his five daughters is staged in celebration of its 50th
anniversary. At Arena Stage. Through Jan. 4.

NOVEMBER

1 "Basetrack."The performance examines war using spoken word, photos and iPhone
videos from Marines in Afghanistan. At Clarice Smith Performing Arts Center, Kay
Theatre.

5 "Bad Jews."Three cousins on varying ends of the religious spectrum fight over
their grandfather's heirloom. At Studio Theatre. Through Dec. 21.

6 "On the Origin of Species: A Nautical Melodrama."Charles Darwin's book about
evolution is given a musical interpretation. At Georgetown University, Davis
Performing Arts Center. Through Nov. 15.

7 "Comedy of Errors."The Baltimore Shakespeare Company stages the Bard's comedy.
At The Great Hall Theatre at St. Mary's. Through Dec. 13.

8 "Green Porno."Isabella Rossellini's show explores the mating processes of a
menagerie of creatures. At George Washington University, Lisner Auditorium.

12 "Disney's the Little Mermaid."Drawing from the Hans Christian Andersen fable
and the animated Disney film, the play follows the adventures of a mermaid who
falls in love with a prince. At Olney Theatre Center. Through Dec. 28.

13 "The Intelligent Homosexual's Guide to Capitalism And Socialism With a Key to
the Scriptures."A Communist intent on suicide gathers his adult children for a
final farewell only to get absorbed in their dramas. At Theater J. Through Dec.
21.

14 "Five Guys Named Moe.""The King of the Jukebox" Louis Jordan is honored in
this musical revue. At Arena Stage. Through Dec. 28.

14 "Tiny Tim's Christmas Carol."Tiny Tim attempts to save the day when Mr.
Scrooge insists that his father, Bob Crachit, work on Christmas Day. At Glen
Echo Park, Adventure Theatre MTC. Through Jan. 1.

15 "Ghost Brothers Of Darkland County."             Stephen King's story about
brotherly love turned fatal is reimagined as a musical with songs by John
Mellencamp. At Warner Theatre.

16 "In the Heat of the Night."In the radio theater company L.A. Theatre Works's
production, a black homicide detective and white police chief must work together
to solve the murder of a white man despite the prevalent prejudices of the South
in the '60s. At George Mason University, Center for the Arts Concert Hall.

18 "It's a Wonderful Life: A Live Radio Play."A wingless angel helps a
down-on-his-luck man learn the value of his life. At Center Stage. Through Dec.
21.

19 "101 Dalmatians."Two dogs set out to rescue their large litter from the evil
Cruella De Vil. At Imagination Stage. Through Jan. 11.

19 "Dido (Queen of Carthage)."The play follows the queen's tragic romance with
Aeneas. At George Mason University, Performing Arts Building, TheaterSpace.
Through Nov. 23.

20 "Bryan Batt: Batt on a Hot Tin Roof."The Broadway and television actor
performs a cabaret. At Mansion at Strathmore.

20 "A Christmas Carol."Edward Gero returns to play Ebenezer Scrooge in Charles
Dickens's classic tale. At Ford's Theatre. Through Jan. 1.

21 "Los Mas Solos."The play, presented by El Salvador's Teatro del Azoro, tells
the effects of the country's civil war through the eyes of four residents of a
mental institution. At Gala Hispanic Theatre. Through Nov. 22.

23 "Mythbusters - Behind the Myths Tour."The television show that uses science
to test myths is reimagined for the stage. At Warner Theatre.

26 "A Broadway Christmas Carol."Song lyrics from classic and modern musicals are
twisted around to relate to Charles Dickens's classic. At MetroStage. Through
Dec. 28.

326 "The Nutcracker."In this area premiere, the original story is reimagined as
a contemporary musical. At Round House Theatre. Through Dec. 28.

28 "A Christmas Carol: A Ghost Story Of Christmas."Paul Morella stars in the
one-man show that uses only the words from Charles Dickens's novella. At Olney
Theatre Center. Through Dec. 28.

29 "Junie B. Jones in Jingle Bells, Batman Smells."             Junie B. must
decide whether to be naughty or nice when she gets her nemesis's name for secret
Santa. At Maryland Ensemble Theatre. Through Dec. 28.

DECEMBER

2 Donny & Marie: Christmas at the National.The Osmond siblings perform
holiday-themed song and dance numbers. At National Theatre. Through Dec. 7.

2 "The Tempest."Shakespeare's magical story about vengeance and romance is
directed by Ethan McSweeny. At Sidney Harman Hall. Through Jan. 11.

3 "Beauty and the Beast."The French fairy tale is given a new adaptation. At
Synetic Theater. Through Jan. 4.

5 Andrea McArdle.Broadway's original "Annie" performs as part of Barbara Cook's
curated series. At Kennedy Center, Terrace Theater.

8 "Black Nativity."Langston Hughes's version of the Christmas story is staged by
Theater Alliance. At Anacostia Playhouse. Through Jan. 4.

9 "Childhood Beliefs: Stories About Magical Thinking, Family Myths, and Things
We Once Thought Were True."SpeakeasyDC hosts a night of themed storytelling. At
Town Danceboutique.

39 "Diner."Sheryl Crow and screenwriter Barry Levinson team up for a world
premiere musical about a group of 20-somethings who return to their favorite
hangout to contemplate getting older. At Signature Theatre. Through Jan. 25.

39 "Famous Puppet Death Scenes."Canada's Old Trout Puppet Workshop portrays 22
famous scenes of death. At Woolly Mammoth Theatre. Through Jan. 4.

10 "Deathtrap."In this thriller, a playwright considers murder as a way to get
around his writer's block. At Everyman Theatre. Through Jan. 11.

10 "Terminus."The play follows three characters as they face their fears and
have brushes with other dark themes, including the Devil. At Studio Theatre.
Through Jan. 4.

12 "Holiday Follies."The cabaret highlights seasonal tunes. At Signature
Theatre. Through Dec. 23.

16 "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat."Diana DeGarmo and Ace Young
star in the biblical musical. At Kennedy Center, Opera House. Through Jan. 4.

316 "Pippin."The musical follows a man as he finds his place in the world. At
National Theatre. Through Jan. 4.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


