                             402 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 7, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Casino Town Rolls the Dice on High-Tech

BYLINE: By DIONNE SEARCEY

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1396 words


RENO, Nev. -- A street newly nicknamed Startup Row intersects this city's old
strip of casinos touting Money Maker Jackpots and Crazy Cash Slot Tournaments.

While old-fashioned slot machines are whirring nearby, this stretch of road has
become a home for smartphone app makers, cloud computing developers and
companies like one that set up shop here recently to build tiny sensors that
allow devices to connect to the Internet.

For most of America, Reno stirs images of worn-out casinos, strip clubs and
quick divorces. But it is trying to change that reputation and reduce its
reliance on gambling by taking advantage of its location and low taxes to gain a
solid footing in the new economy. Instead of poker payouts, Reno now boasts of
e-commerce ventures, an Apple data center and a testing ground for drones. It
also hopes to attract a large factory to build batteries for Tesla's electric
vehicles.

''People believe in this town, and they're tired of being presented as this
joke,'' said Abbi Whitaker, a local business owner who helped create a marketing
campaign to reshape Reno's image. ''When you're at rock bottom there's a good
chance to reinvent how you go up.''

Reno exemplifies how cities not far from California, including Boise, Idaho, and
Tucson, are trying to poach the state's technology culture to help diversify
their economies, marketing themselves as places where taxes are lower and
environmental regulations are less onerous. They hope that when the next
recession strikes, they will not sink to the same depths as they did in the last
one.

Reno is among the best situated, less than a four-hour drive from San Francisco
and in a state with no corporate or inventory taxes. It gained appeal as an
outpost of Silicon Valley nearly a decade ago after a Microsoft licensing unit
and an Amazon distribution warehouse moved in. California refugees were buying
homes, lured by the relatively low cost of living and the 30-minute drive to
Lake Tahoe.

Then came the Great Recession, walloping Reno's gambling industry, and its
housing and job markets. At the end of the recession in 2009, homes had lost
nearly half the value they had in the beginning of 2006, and median prices
continued to fall. At its depths in September 2010, Reno's unemployment rate was
13.4 percent compared with the national average, 9.5 percent, according to
Moody's Analytics.

But now, after several years scraping along the bottom in almost every measure
of economic health, Reno appears poised to turn the corner, according to
economists who study the region. Housing prices are slowly starting to rise. The
unemployment rate has declined to 7.1 percent. New technology companies are
arriving, and older ones are expanding, including Zulily, an e-commerce company
for women and children's clothing and home d√©cor, which announced plans in May
to double its warehouse and hire 600 people.

Most of all, civic boosters are on edge waiting for Tesla, Elon Musk's electric
vehicle company, to announce the location of its new battery factory that is
expected to employ more than 6,000 people. Tesla has said it is considering
Nevada, Texas, California, Arizona and New Mexico.

Reno is not far from one of the few lithium deposits in the country, it is
relatively close to Fremont, Calif., where the vehicles will be assembled, and
its industrial park has tens of thousands of acres of land for the auto
company's new expansive factory. Tesla officials did not respond to requests for
comment.

''There are solid reasons to be optimistic about Reno,'' said Greg Bird, an
economist at Moody's Analytics. ''We're starting to really see the data turn for
them.''

Reno competes for new businesses with Salt Lake City and major cities in
Arizona, all of which are convenient for online retailers to set up shipping
locations for customers in California and the rest of the West. In Tucson,
Duralar Technologies, a global nanotechnology company, announced in March that
it planned to set up its United States headquarters there.

Boise has increased its marketing to lure new technology companies and has drawn
several start-ups in recent years, said Clark Krause, executive director of the
Boise Valley Economic Partnership. The organization emphasizes its outdoor
lifestyle on its website.

It is not a simple climb back from the depths of the recession for these cities.
Nearly all are constrained by a shortage of skilled workers to fill the jobs
created by companies their economic development offices are trying to attract.

''We have the same challenges everyone else does when it comes to finding enough
talent to grow as much as we could,'' Mr. Krause said.

In Reno, where many workers traditionally have been employed in some aspect of
the gambling industry, the work force is less educated than in more populous
cities, economists said. Tesla, for instance, might have to recruit from
elsewhere to find enough trained workers for its battery plant, should it decide
to build here.

''We're not going to wait for the gaming industry to come back,'' said Mike
Kazmierski, president of the Economic Development Authority of Western Nevada.
''It's not going to. So what are our strengths, and how do we capitalize on
them?''

Mr. Kazmierski is encouraging Reno to prepare for the new kinds of companies his
team is wooing. A major part of his strategy is just up the hill from Reno's
casino strip: the University of Nevada, Reno. The campus of 18,000 students has
traditionally not played a major role in the city's economy and is physically
separated from the rest of town by Interstate 80. Students often earn their
degrees and leave.

But now, the university is starting to work with Mr. Kazmierski's team to make
sure students are trained in specific skills or even the languages needed by
companies looking to settle in Reno. The university created an on-campus office
space this spring for an Australian drone company that decided to open a
research outlet in Reno, one of a handful of locations the federal government
has selected for testing unoccupied aerial vehicles.

Separately, the university just announced plans to take over an empty downtown
building that will house a center for drone research, a student welcome center
and a coffee shop.

Mr. Kazmierski outlined his vision on a recent morning driving down Reno's
casino strip, past the Showboat Inn, the pay-by-the-week motels and signs
advertising $5.99 prime rib and fries. Towering old casino buildings could be
turned into student dormitories or condos. Storefronts could house technology
companies. The new drone research building could host an incubator space for
businesses.

For companies, the region's chief draw is its lack of taxes. But the location
has other advantages. Reno is less than a two-day drive to anywhere in the West,
an advantage for shipping companies.

And there is no shortage of land ready for development. Outside town, along
miles of scrubby desert, large manufacturing centers, distribution centers and
office parks already have moved in, and more are on the way. The area is so
expansive that wild horses roam among the warehouses. Surveyor stakes mark new
developments, and fire hydrants sprout seemingly in the middle of nowhere.

Three years ago Reno and the neighboring town Sparks averaged four tours a month
for prospective companies. Mr. Kazmierski said that had increased to 10, with
scouts from 14 companies visiting in May.

''The most challenging obstacle to get over is our image,'' he said. ''That
image of a second-tier kind of Vegas is embedded in their heads.''

Visiting executives are surprised to learn that the Truckee River cuts through
downtown, where a restaurant scene is emerging. Bike paths wind through the city
and beyond, and urban gardeners raise chickens in their backyards. A new
downtown boutique hotel has no casino. Instead, its main feature is its 164-foot
climbing wall.

The Reno Collective, along Startup Row, offers a shared work space to foster
entrepreneurialism. On a recent day the office was filled by young people
tapping on laptops, some sitting on exercise balls, and one with a dog curled
around her feet.

In the same building, Eric Jennings set up his company, Pinoccio, two years ago,
making tiny radio sensors for enabling Internet connectivity.

''There's such a low barrier to entry here,'' Mr. Jennings said. ''If you're
passionate about something you can just take it on.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/07/business/reno-nevada-recasts-itself-as-home-to
-tech-start-ups.html

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Clockwise from top: Horses at a warehouse in Tahoe-Reno
Industrial Center. The Truckee River cuts through downtown Reno. Startup Row, a
development hub downtown. Pinoccio, on Startup Row, makes radio sensors. A
Zulily plant being built at Tahoe-Reno Industrial Center. The Whitney Peak Hotel
in downtown Reno. (B1)
 Abbi Whitaker, owner of the Abbi Agency, who helped create a campaign to
reshape Reno's image, with the chef Mark Estee at Campo, his restaurant along
the Truckee River downtown. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAVID CALVERT FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES) (B4) CHARTS: A Slow Turnaround: Reno, Nev., which is heavily dependent on
the gambling industry, had a more severe downturn than other parts of the
country. But as  the area attracts new employers with its convenient location
and low taxes, the economy is starting to recover. (Source: Moody's Analytics)
(B4)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


