                              40 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 25, 2013 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Drones Offer Journalists a Wider View

BYLINE: By LESLIE KAUFMAN and RAVI SOMAIYA

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1074 words


The best way to film the destruction wrought by Typhoon Haiyan in Tacloban, the
Philippines, said Lewis Whyld, a British photographer, was from the air.

But Mr. Whyld did not want to beg for a ride on a military helicopter, taking
the space of much-needed aid. So he launched a drone into the skies above the
city. In addition to shots that showed the scale of the damage, broadcast by CNN
recently, his drone discovered two bodies that were later recovered by the
authorities, he said in an interview.

''The newspaper was for still images,'' said Mr. Whyld, who builds his own
drones, ''but the Internet is for this.''

Mr. Whyld, and CNN, are not alone in exploring the potential of drones. The
Associated Press and News Corporation have used them to show the scale of large
disasters. News Corporation has also used them to shoot sports in Australia.
Sophisticated nature documentaries use them to get intimate shots of wildlife.
Paparazzi use them to chase celebrities in Europe, and reports suggest they have
been used to pursue celebrities in the United States, too.

Drones, or ''unmanned aerial systems,'' as many of their handlers prefer to call
them, are meant to fly automatically, without skilled pilots. They were largely
developed for, and remain associated with, the military. But they are
increasingly being used for civilian purposes, including journalism.

The machines have proved most valuable in providing film footage or photography
of things that are difficult to reach, like wildlife or geographic formations.
In the future, however, their capabilities may be expanded to include sensors
that can help with environmental coverage, for instance, by providing readings
on air quality.

''What drones give you is anywhere, anytime access to the sky,'' said Chris
Anderson, a former editor of Wired magazine who runs a drone company. ''That
perspective is something a journalist just wouldn't have unless he waited for
officials, or hired a plane.''

Early this fall the BBC launched an 18-inch, six-rotored unstaffed machine into
the sky to report on a high-speed train being planned to travel from London to
Manchester. The train is controversial because it would cut through and, some
argue, despoil some of the most pristine rural land in England.

''The idea was we needed to get above to give our viewers the full scope of the
problem,'' said Tom Hannen, who operates the program.

Mr. Whyld is exploring long-range drones, which can fly 10 or 20 miles from
their handler, and looking into new sensors like heat-seeking cameras.

''I'm also thinking about detection devices for chemical weapons, so you could
fly into Syria,'' he said. ''You can do journalism that wasn't previously
possible.''

Regulations, however, have taken a different flight path. In Britain, extensive
testing and several thousand dollars are required for permission to fly, Mr.
Whyld said. In the United States, the Federal Aviation Administration allows
only drone manufacturers and public entities like law enforcement agencies to
test the aircraft. The agency will begin wider testing, which should lead to
rules for other purposes, such as journalism.

Journalism programs, including those at the University of Missouri and the
University of Nebraska, and the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia
University, have started drone journalism courses. Columbia does not teach
hands-on skills, but students at Missouri have used drones over the Missouri
River for a report about hydraulic fracturing and over the prairie for a story
about controlled burns. But in August, the F.A.A. ordered journalism schools to
stop flights unless they obtained permission from the agency.

Many drone enthusiasts remain optimistic that restrictions will be loosened
because the Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 requires that the F.A.A. safely
integrate unstaffed aerial vehicles into United States airspace by 2015. (The
agency recently released a map that indicated that journalism could be among
interesting potential uses for drones.) ''It is definitely in the early days,''
said Fergus Pitt, with the Tow Center, ''but there is so much potential when the
regulations come off.''

Earthflight, a 2011 BBC documentary about birds, offers one vivid example of the
technology. A drone with especially small and quiet rotors took astonishing
shots of a flock of two million flamingos. Whereas a helicopter would have
spooked the skittish birds, the narrator explains, ''the drone hardly ruffles a
feather as it captures a view of the greatest gathering of flamingos seen for 20
years.''

Using drones around people is more problematic. The aircraft are often heavy,
powerful machines. In recent episodes they crashed into skyscrapers in Midtown
Manhattan and fell to a sidewalk, and spun out of control and into the crowd at
a bull-running event in Virginia.

Another concern is that drones, which can sneak into situations not accessible
to a regular photographer, will be used to invade privacy, particularly of
famous people.

In August, a drone watched the private wedding in Switzerland of the singer Tina
Turner. The same month, a photographer on Coney Island launched a drone to
capture footage of the singer Beyonc√© on a roller coaster, according to Carlo
Allegri, a freelance photographer on assignment for Reuters who took a picture
of the aircraft.

The drone was two or three feet across, and flew autonomously, perhaps by GPS,
for about 10 minutes before it returned to its operator, Mr. Allegri said. ''It
was mesmerizing,'' he said.

But Nabiha Syed, a First Amendment lawyer in private practice who also works
under contract for The New York Times, said it was not likely that drones start
an era when cameras will hover outside Alec Baldwin's window unmolested.

''The idea of privacy is not a new one,'' she said. ''We have grappled with new
technologies, like cellphones with cameras, before. We have a thicket of privacy
law already and don't need new laws at this stage.''

Mr. Anderson said that whether the F.A.A. has privacy concerns or otherwise, the
likelihood is that drones will soon become a tool of journalism, for good or
ill.

The technology is getting cheaper and better, he said. Soon it will be possible
to open an application on an iPhone or iPad, click a map coordinate and have a
drone fly to that point with little or no technical skill, he said.

''This is very much like the personal computer. It's going from industrial
machines to personal ones.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/25/business/media/drones
-offer-journalists-a-wider-view.html

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The BBC used a drone to gather information for a report on a
high-speed train planned to travel from London to Manchester. (B1)
 Owain Rich, a pilot for the BBC, prepared to launch the smallest of the news
organization's three drone aircraft. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BBC NEWS) (B6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


