                             432 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (T Magazine)

                            December 6, 2013 Friday

Seven Days of Style | The Duchess of Cambridge's Pricey New 'Do, Jay Z and
Beyonce's New Diet and Alexander's Wang's Foray Into Music

BYLINE: ALICE GREGORY

SECTION: T-MAGAZINE; culture

LENGTH: 584 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Plus, Starbucks&#8217;s &#8220;metal&#8221; gift card, which the
retailer plans to deliver online purchases by drone in 2015, Pantone&#8217;s
color of the year and more, as we run the numbers from the last week in style
and culture.


  ALL THE NUMBERS THAT MATTER FROM THE WEEK IN STYLE AND CULTURE
  Nov. 30 - Dec. 6

3%
Drop in Thanksgiving weekend sales, retail's biggest four-day-shopping period of
the year. The fall - about $1.7 billion less than last year - came as a surprise
to those expecting a bump, considering this year's especially short period
between Thanksgiving and Christmas. Hard to be too torn up about this.

9
Pages long was the letter sent out by the investor Engaged Capital calling for
Abercrombie & Fitch to replace the C.E.O., Mike Jeffries, whose contract expires
next February. The research-heavy letter quotes Jim Cramer of CNBC saying, "This
used to be the hottest teen brand in the world, yet under Jeffries's recent
leadership, Abercrombie & Fitch has become practically irrelevant." Woof.

14
Number of photography-related accessories the lifestyle photographer Todd Selby
has collaborated on for his first real venture into retail. The snap-happy
impresario teamed up with six labels and artists on the Selbz capsule
collection, which includes as-yet mysterious goods like "tassels" and
"reflectors." Monetized procrastination: it's the name of the game.

18-3224
Name of Pantone's color of 2014, a.k.a. "Radiant Orchid." Per the Pantone Color
Institute, "It is a captivating purple, one that draws you in with its beguiling
charm." Juicy Couture is already incorporating the hue in forthcoming designs.
Captivating indeed.

22
Number of days that Jay Z and Beyonce will be refraining from animal products
this month. Inspired by an "exercise physiologist friend" (can we get more on
him?), the duo went vegan starting Tuesday, the day before Jay's 44th birthday.
That really does little to explain the timing, though. Is there a worse 22-day
period to abstain from, oh, say, eggnog, ham, goose, unidentifiable holiday
party pastries, novelty lattes, gingerbread ... ?

30
Minutes it will take Amazon's in-the-works drones to deliver packages. The
C.E.O., Jeff Bezos, announced on "60 Minutes" that Amazon Prime Air (still in
R&D) won't be sky-borne until at least 2015, due to current F.A.A. regulations.
Amazon: predatory pricing, drones ... so sinister it's funny.

$449
What you'll have to spend to get your ears into a pair of Alexander
Wang-designed Beats by Dre. The limited-edition headphones - matte black,
predictably enough, and available Dec. 15 - appear, at least at first glance,
identical to the normal ones.

$984
Price for Kate Middleton's latest haircut. The Duchess was shorn by the
monarchal stylist Rossano Ferretti with a pair of handmade texturing scissors.
So far the trim, apparently induced by some gray-hair-related fears, has been
photographed obscured beneath a diamond headpiece and swept into an updo.

1,000
Number of limited-edition rose gold (-hued) Starbucks cards that Gilt Groupe is
minting this winter. Four hundred and fifty bucks will get you 400-preloaded
dollars and what appears to be some restricted tea and coffee refills. As
everyone knows, there's nothing cooler than flashing a gift card. ...

$140,000
Dollar equivalent of pounds fetched at auction in London for a moth-eaten ball
gown of Princess Diana's. The dress, designed by David and Elizabeth Emanuel,
came with a matching tiara and petticoat, and was purchased by Di in 1986 at a
Red Cross benefit fashion show. The white confection, adorned with rhinestones,
sequins and pearls, was bought by an anonymous museum. As for the Matell
replica? Now we wait. ...

Instagram of the Week
 "Art lessons! Jeff Koons & Nori #ArtBasel"

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


