                             441 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 7, 2014 Monday 2:34 AM EST

In Iraq, airstrikes slam into Mosul, city held by al-Qaeda-inspired militants;
Bombings come day after leader if Islamic State appears in video taken at city's
main mosque.

BYLINE: Abigail Hauslohner

LENGTH: 855 words


BAGHDAD - Warplanes carried out multiple bombing raids in the northern Iraqi
city of Mosul on Sunday, a day after the leader of a powerful al-Qaeda-inspired
militant group appeared online in a video from the city's main mosque.

Residents of the city, reached by phone, said airstrikes shook the city at least
three times Sunday, starting at dawn. It remains unclear what force carried out
the airstrikes. The U.S. Defense Department said that it had no knowledge of the
airstrikes and that U.S. forces were not involved. An Iraqi government official
in Baghdad said he had no information about any airstrikes near Mosul.

On Friday, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State, which declared
a revival of the medieval Islamic caliphate in Iraq and Syria last week,
delivered a sermon to worshipers from Mosul's Great Mosque.

The video, which appeared online Saturday, marked the first time that the
elusive extremist leader has appeared in a video.

The fact that Baghdadi ventured into public at all appeared to underscore just
how solidly the group controls Mosul, which it seized June 9 in a stunning
offensive that simultaneously instigated the collapse of an entire regional
division of the Iraqi army.

At least one of the strikes on Sunday tore through a cluster of homes in the
village of Rashidiya, on Mosul's northern outskirts, one local resident claimed,
charging that the dead were civilians.

"There were four houses destroyed. Two families were killed," said a 75-year-old
retired military officer who lives in the area.

Hamid al-Mutlaq, a Sunni member of parliament who until recently served on the
security and defense committee, confirmed that airstrikes had destroyed a number
of homes in Rashidiya and in the Mosul neighborhood of Tamooz. A local medical
official told the Associated Press that at least seven people were killed in the
strikes and 30 were wounded.

A pro-government news Web site said dozens of Sunni militants from the Islamic
State were killed in an airstrike on a presidential palace compound in north
Mosul.

A former air force pilot who spoke from the city center Sunday said that the
strikes marked the first in days but that he wasn't sure of the targets.

"The doors and windows have been shaking," he said over the phone. The man
requested anonymity for fear of retribution.

An official in the office of Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki said that he
had no information about airstrikes in or around Mosul. The Iraqi military could
not be reached for comment.

But the former pilot described seeing an American-made C-130 military transport
plane that could belong to the Iraqi air force. "It's a cargo airplane. Not a
drone," he said. Over the past seven days, the residents had heard the sound of
drones, he said. This was different.

Other residents said they couldn't see the planes because the aircraft were
flying high but that they heard the noise of the strikes. Some, including
Mutlaq, the parliamentarian, blamed Iran.

On Saturday, Iranian state media reported that an Iranian pilot had been killed
in Iraq. Iran's official Islamic Republic News Agency did not publish details of
how the man died but said that he was killed defending the Shiite holy city of
Samarra, which lies near the edge of the Islamic State's control, north of
Baghdad.

The Iraqi military says it carried out a series of airstrikes in recent weeks on
areas now controlled by Sunni militants, particularly in the city of Tikrit,
former dictator Saddam Hussein's home town.

There have been no confirmed U.S. drone strikes or Iranian airstrikes in Iraq.

But the United States is currently flying armed and unarmed drones over Iraq,
U.S. officials have said.

Washington has dramatically increased its aerial surveillance of the country
over the past month since militants from the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria,
now known as the Islamic State, swept control of a vast swath of territory
stretching from eastern Syria into central Iraq.

Mosul residents said that local communication networks shut down Friday and were
not functioning midday, when Baghdadi would have arrived at Mosul's Great Mosque
to deliver his sermon.

"We thought Baghdad had blocked it to isolate us from the world," the former
pilot said, referring to the Iraqi central government, which has vowed to
recapture Mosul from the militants. Now he said he believed that the Islamic
State had blocked it to shield Baghdadi's movements that day.

It's unclear if the Iraqi government or Washington was aware of Baghdadi's
whereabouts before the appearance of the video Saturday.

In 2011, the United States named Baghdadi a specially designated global
terrorist and offered a $10Â million reward for information that could lead to
his capture.

On Sunday, a spokesman for Iraq's military told reporters that Iraqi forces were
studying the video and had yet to reach a conclusion on whether the man in it
was, indeed, Baghdadi. But the SITE Intelligence Group, which closely monitors
extremist groups in the region, confirmed that it was Baghdadi.

abigail.hauslohner@washpost.com

Khalid Ali in Baghdad and Karen DeYoung in Washington contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


