                             469 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 6, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Broken Bow Hairs, Puns and Idiosyncratic Style

BYLINE: By VIVIEN SCHWEITZER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 374 words


It is increasingly common for adventurous musicians like Chris Thile to take a
mix-and-match approach to programming. Instead of performing a Bach partita or
complete sonata in reverential entirety, he might juxtapose movements with
eclectic repertory to highlight unlikely connections.

The Finnish violinist Pekka Kuusisto, who performs jazz, folk music and
electronic music as well as standard classical fare, often takes a similar tack.
But there was certainly nothing standard about his interpretation of Bach's
Partita for Solo Violin No. 2 in D minor on Friday evening at Le Poisson Rouge,
played for an enthusiastic capacity crowd.

Mr. Kuusisto's passionate rendition of the work's Chaconne proved arresting; his
idiosyncratic style stopped short of indulgent with unpredictable twists of
tempo, phrasing and dynamics. During his no-holds-barred playing, there were
many broken bow hairs, which danced over his instrument like gossamer insect
legs.

The concert also featured the composer and pianist Nico Muhly, who performed
some of his own works for duo with Mr. Kuusisto. Those scores, as well as Arvo
PÃ¤rt's ''Fratres'' and Philip Glass's ''The Orchard,'' were interspersed with
movements from the Partita. Thus the Partita's Allemande segued without pause
into ''Fratres,'' a beautiful, meditative work composed in 1977 for strings and
winds and since rearranged for various figurations, including piano and violin.

After a striking rendition of the Courante from the Partita, the duo offered the
intense, hypnotic ''The Orchard'' by Mr. Glass, an important mentor to Mr.
Muhly.

Mr. Muhly composed ''Drones and Violin'' for Mr. Kuusisto; each instrument
establishes a drone, contrasted with fast, fluttering motifs. The pair also
performed a slow, enigmatic movement from Mr. Muhly's ''Drones and Piano,'' in
which the violin part unfolded with quivering brush strokes.

Mr. Kuusisto, whose engaging commentary and jokes enlivened the concert,
announced before performing the Chaconne: ''When that's finished -- no pun
intended --'' he would offer some traditional Finnish tunes.

He gave a brief description of the songs before beginning to sing in a lilting
voice in his native language, tapping his foot and strumming his violin like a
guitar.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/06/arts/music/nico-muhly-and-pekka-kuusisto-at-le
-poisson-rouge.html

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Nico Muhly and Pekka Kuusisto , from left, performed works by
Mr. Muhly, among several other composers, at Le Poisson Rouge on Friday.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY BRIAN HARKIN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


