                             473 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 8, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A General in a Classroom Takes On the Ethics of War

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN.

Email: sgf1@columbia.edu; Twitter: @SamuelGFreedman

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; ON RELIGION; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1054 words


NOTRE DAME, Ind. -- Three years after Robert H. Latiff received his star as a
brigadier general in the Air Force, the United States prepared to invade Iraq. A
military man since 1974, General Latiff was hardly an innocent in matters of
warfare, including the one being declared by President George W. Bush against
global terror.

General Latiff, after all, had lost one of his neighbors on Sept. 11, 2001, as a
passenger in the first plane that crashed into the World Trade Center. He had
supported sending troops into Afghanistan to defeat Al Qaeda.

Yet General Latiff harbored enough doubts about the wisdom and logic of
assaulting Iraq that he considered retiring in protest. His mentor, a four-star
general, told him not to bother. Nobody would notice the act of conscience of a
mere brigadier.

So General Latiff stayed in the active military until 2006, earning the rank of
major general and the Distinguished Service Medal. Meanwhile, he winced at the
photographs of atrocities at Abu Ghraib and reluctantly signed stop-loss orders
extending soldiers' deployments. ''I didn't act on my deeply held disgust,'' he
recalled recently. ''And that still claws at me.''

That acute sense of self-criticism also helps explain why Dr. Latiff, 63, now
wearing the blue blazer and oxford shirt of a professor with a Ph.D., strolled
into a classroom at the University of Notre Dame one afternoon last month for
the opening session of Philosophy 20628. The course is called ''The Ethics of
Emerging Weapons Technologies,'' and it is a forum for both Dr. Latiff and his
students to grapple with the moral meaning of arms.

The syllabus, as Dr. Latiff explained to his 35 or so undergrads, centers on the
arsenal of the high-tech era: drones, cyberwarfare, robotics, data mining,
soldier enhancement by prostheses or drugs. Just because we have these weapons,
he asked the class, should we use them? If we use them, how can we stop others
from using them? The search for answers to such questions will occupy the
semester.

And while the hardware is new, the questions are not. The assigned readings,
dealing with the ethics of war, include Thucydides and Thomas Aquinas. In his
first lecture, Dr. Latiff went back in time to 1139, when Pope Innocent II
banned the use of that era's cutting-edge armament, the crossbow, against
Christians. He mentioned the American decisions to firebomb Dresden and drop
atomic bombs on Japan in World War II. Drawing closer to his own era, he spoke
of Agent Orange, the toxic defoliant used in the Vietnam War.

''At the time, it was an expedient thing to do,'' he said, using words that
could well apply to drones today. ''It helped us find the enemy. But was there
anyone who thought about long-term consequence? I contend there was nobody.''

In trying to be such a somebody now, it is no mere coincidence that Dr. Latiff
devised Philosophy 20628 specifically for Notre Dame. He earned all three of his
degrees here. He studied Catholic theology and existential philosophy against
the backdrop of the countercultural 1960s; simultaneously, he served in the
R.O.T.C. as part of the military scholarship that was the only way he, the son
of a shopkeeper in Appalachia, could have afforded a private university.

''Quite an unusual mix,'' as he put it recently.

In his military career, too, Dr. Latiff traversed borders. He held leadership
positions overseeing the research and development of advanced weapons for both
the Air Force and the C.I.A. Yet the intelligence agency also sent him to an
executive seminar in Aspen, Colo., based on a ''great books'' curriculum, where
he spent two weeks of 12-hour days discussing moral thinkers from Plato to the
Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.

Dr. Latiff's own ruminations often turned to the profusion of new weapons.
''There was nothing that struck me as terrible and awful,'' he recalled, ''but
there were a few things that made me worry.''

So in 2010 he took his questing intellect and restless conscience back to his
alma mater with a proposal for a new course. Notre Dame requires all
undergraduates to take two classes apiece in philosophy and theology. And in a
deeper way, the course about weapons and ethics fit uniquely well.

''There's no better place than Notre Dame to be thinking about these kinds of
issues,'' Dr. Latiff said. ''The whole body of Catholic social teaching, the
fact that just-war theory began with Aquinas. Notre Dame makes no bones about
the fact it brings a moral, theological, ethical view to national questions.
That's its reason to exist.''

Indeed, Dr. Latiff teaches the course with a doctoral candidate in the
philosophy of science, Charles H. Pence. They draw students from the R.O.T.C.
and peace studies, from philosophy and engineering. For all of them, the
semester culminates in a collaboration with several classmates to write a policy
for the ethical use of a next-generation weapon.

''When you think of philosophy, you think of Aristotle and Plato and old people,
and it seems outdated,'' said Elizabeth Terino, 21, who took the course in the
spring semester last year as a sophomore. ''Here you have a philosophy course
that's relevant to the modern world. You can wake up and read a newspaper about
the use of drones in Yemen and say, 'Oh, we were talking about the international
law about that yesterday.' So you can ask yourself, 'I wonder what made them
make that decision.' It makes it very real-world.''

In his real-world life, Dr. Latiff has written forcefully of his concerns about
''emerging robotic armies'' with ''no more than a veneer of human control.'' He
has served on a committee that is producing a report on ethics and new weaponry
for the National Research Council. It will be the subject of a conference at
Notre Dame in April.

From his lectern, however, Dr. Latiff offers questions far more often than
anything resembling an answer. What he sees, in turn, is a kind of dawning
revelation, one that reminds him of his own.

''Most everybody in the military, including me for many years, felt that if war
fighters need something, we should get it to them with the fewest impediments,''
he said. ''And many of the students start out with a blas√© attitude: 'The
military needs this kind of stuff.' It's not till I start scratching the ethical
issues that they warm up. And once they get thinking, they're on a roll.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/08/us/a-general-in-a-classroom-takes-on-the-ethic
s-of-war.html

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Robert H. Latiff, who served in the Air Force as a major
general, is now teaching a philosophy course, ''The Ethics of Emerging Weapons
Technologies,'' at the University of Notre Dame. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ARMANDO L.
SANCHEZ FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


