                             481 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Ordered to Release Memo in Awlaki Killing

BYLINE: By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 918 words


A federal appeals panel in Manhattan ordered the release on Monday of key
portions of a classified Justice Department memorandum that provided the legal
justification for the targeted killing of a United States citizen, Anwar
al-Awlaki, who intelligence officials contend had joined Al Qaeda and died in a
2011 drone strike in Yemen.

The unanimous three-judge panel, reversing a lower court decision, said the
government had waived its right to keep the analysis secret in light of numerous
public statements by administration officials and the Justice Department's
release of a ''white paper'' offering a detailed analysis of why targeted
killings were legal.

''Whatever protection the legal analysis might once have had,'' Judge Jon O.
Newman wrote for the panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit, ''has been lost by virtue of public statements of public officials at
the highest levels and official disclosure of the D.O.J. White Paper.''

The ruling stemmed from lawsuits filed under the Freedom of Information Act by
The New York Times and two of its reporters, Charlie Savage and Scott Shane, and
by the American Civil Liberties Union.

The decision reversed a January 2013 ruling by Judge Colleen McMahon of Federal
District Court, who had expressed her own doubts about the legality of the
targeted killings program and the secrecy cloaking it, but concluded that the
government had not violated the law in refusing to turn over the materials
sought in the requests.

Judge McMahon, however, issued her decision about a month before the Justice
Department released its ''white paper'' after it was originally leaked to NBC
News; the 16-page, single-spaced document made a detailed legal justification
for the killing of Mr. Awlaki, which the appellate panel took into account in
its ruling.

The panel also cited public statements by officials like Attorney General Eric
H. Holder Jr. and John O. Brennan, when he was the president's top
counterterrorism adviser, discussing the lawfulness of the targeted killing of
terrorists.

The panel, which also included Judges Jos√© A. Cabranes and Rosemary S. Pooler,
did agree to a government request to redact certain portions of the legal
analysis that it ordered released. Portions of the panel's opinion were also
redacted, with the possibility of restoration later, and the panel explained
that it had filed its full opinion under seal, along with a redacted copy of the
Justice Department memorandum that had been sought by the plaintiffs.

It was unclear how quickly the legal analysis might be made public; the
government could ultimately seek review by the full appeals court or the Supreme
Court. A Justice Department spokesman had no comment.

Steven Aftergood, a government secrecy specialist at the Federation of American
Scientists, said the ruling was ''clearly a rebuff to the administration's
secrecy policy.''

''What makes it particularly significant is that it applies not just to a single
document but to a habitual practice of government officials,'' he said, ''which
is to say, 'I'm going to talk about something that's classified, but I'm not
going to give you the underlying records.' ''

Lawyers for the plaintiffs praised the ruling.

David E. McCraw, a lawyer for The Times, said: ''The court declined to accept at
face value the government's claims about national security and instead did a
searching and independent review of the record.''

Jameel Jaffer, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union, added: ''This
is a resounding rejection of the government's effort to use secrecy, and
selective disclosure, as a means of manipulating public opinion about the
targeted killing program. The government can't pretend that everything about its
targeted killing program is a classified secret while senior officials
selectively disclose information meant to paint the program in the most
favorable light.''

Mr. Awlaki, a New Mexico-born cleric who the Obama administration contends had
become a senior operative in the Yemen branch of Al Qaeda, was killed in a Sept.
30, 2011, drone attack that also killed Samir Khan, an American citizen who had
moved to Yemen from North Carolina, and who administration officials say had not
been specifically targeted.

The panel noted that the plaintiffs had not challenged the legality of drone
strikes or targeted killings, and it said that the government had not waived
secrecy concerning operational details in the memorandum, which it said had been
prepared by the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel, ran 41 pages and
was dated July 16, 2010.

Judge Newman wrote that even if the public statements by administration
officials, before and after Judge McMahon's opinion was issued, were not
themselves ''sufficiently detailed to establish waiver of the secrecy of the
legal analysis,'' they established the ''context in which the most revealing
document,'' the so-called white paper, ''should be evaluated.''

The panel's description of the classified Justice Department memorandum is
redacted in the public opinion, but the panel also noted that Mr. Holder, before
the Senate Judiciary Committee last year, ''publicly acknowledged the close
relationship'' between the ''white paper'' and previous advice from the Office
of Legal Counsel.

Judge Newman added that it was no longer either logical or plausible to maintain
that disclosure of the legal analysis would risk disclosing ''any aspect'' of
military plans, intelligence activities, sources and methods or foreign
relations.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/22/nyregion/panel-orders-release-of-document-in-t
argeted-killing-of-anwar-al-awlaki.html

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


