                             502 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 15, 2014 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Soccer Match in Serbia Erupts in Riot Set Off by Drone

BYLINE: By ROBERT MACKEY

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; OPEN SOURCE; Pg.

LENGTH: 911 words


A soccer match between the national teams of Serbia and Albania had to be
abandoned on Tuesday night in Belgrade after rioting provoked by the sudden
appearance of a small drone, flying low over the stadium and trailing an
Albanian nationalist banner.

Video recorded by a spectator in the stands showed the immediate reaction from
the Serbian fans, who booed and whistled before taking up a chant of ''Kill!
Kill! Kill!'' Albanians, as a flare was thrown onto the field of play.

[Video: Video shot by a witness to the appearance of a drone trailing an
Albanian nationalist banner over a stadium in Belgrade on Tuesday. Watch on
YouTube.]

Serbian television showed the chaotic scenes that ensued after a Serbian player,
Stefan Mitrovic, pulled down the banner as it dropped close to the field, and
was immediately challenged by an Albanian player.

[Video: Serbian television coverage of the soccer match that descended into a
riot on Tuesday night in Belgrade. Watch on YouTube.]

After the players faced off, journalists in the press box watched in amazement
as Serbian fans, some wielding chairs, streamed onto the field and began
attacking the Albanian team.

[Video: Video of the fighting that ended a match between Serbia and Albania in
Belgrade. Watch on YouTube.]

Mitrovic, jumps, grabs the flag as it falls -- and all hell has now broken lose
here. Players and officials on both sides fighting. -- Nick Ames (@NickAmes82)
October 14, 2014

Mavraj takes the flag from MitroviÄ++ and the fight starts. Complete chaos.
Players chasing on the pitch, some fans entering it. -- SaÅ¡a Ibrulj
(@sasaibrulj) October 14, 2014

pic.twitter.com/j7air6Hu84 -- MÃ«mÃ«dhe G. Ibrahimi (@MemedheIbrahimi) October
14, 2014

Hooligan greift albanischen Spieler an #seralb #uefa2016
pic.twitter.com/tMcfGr8A3W -- klaudio.photography (@klaudiophotos) October 14,
2014

The officials, led by the English referee Martin Atkinson, then decided to
suspend the game, and the players ran to their locker rooms.

In a match report for The Guaridan that seemed closer to an account of a boxing
contest than a soccer game, the correspondents Nick Ames and Sasa Ibrulj
reported:

Mitrovic caught the flag and was immediately accosted by Albanian players Andi
Lila and Taulant Xhaka, the insignia eventually ending up in the hands of the
striker Bekim Balaj, who began to carry it towards the touchline. By this time,
officials and substitutes from both teams had entered the pitch, the Serbian
replacement Nenad Tomovic running from the bench and blocking Balaj's path. At
the same time, a supporter attacked Balaj with a plastic chair which prompted a
violent melee.

Images shared on Twitter showed that the Albanian players -- including a large
contingent born in Kosovo, a former province of Serbia with an Albanian majority
that fought a bitter war for its independence 15 years ago -- were then pelted
by objects thrown from the stands as they retreated.

Ovo nismo videli, ali svet jeste! pic.twitter.com/rFkffK16Xr -- Milan MiÄ++a
JovanoviÄ++ (@MilanMJovanovic) October 14, 2014

The banner that provoked the riot celebrated Albanian heroes, including one who
fought the Serbs in the early 20th century, and ultranationalist aspirations for
a state of ''Greater Albania,'' which would include all of Kosovo. The banner
was also emblazoned with the word ''autochthonous,'' a reference to the
Albanians' claim that they are the indigenous people of the Balkans, descended
from the ancient Illyrians, and that the Serbs are mere interlopers.

A flag appeared in #Belgrade. 2 biggest #Albanian heroes Ismail Qemali & Isa
Boletini on. #Autocthounous #SERALB pic.twitter.com/DIHz9nfkXq -- Vigan Qorrolli
(@ViganQorrolli) October 14, 2014

On social networks, the stunt was broadly condemned by Serbs as an unbearable
provocation and celebrated by Albanians as a triumphant gesture.

Flag of Greater Albania that "landed" on a stadium in Belgrade. Horrible and
extremely unsportsmanlike provocation pic.twitter.com/mlOZ8sLBUx -- Zoran
SokiÄ++ (@Solisio) October 14, 2014

Kjo o si me t'hi prej oxhaku #AUTOCHTHONUS #ProudToBeAlbanian
pic.twitter.com/EvaLAaRMOR -- Fitim (@FitimHotii) October 14, 2014

#AUTOCHTHONUS pic.twitter.com/mnlj6o0XED -- MÃ«mÃ«dhe G. Ibrahimi
(@MemedheIbrahimi) October 14, 2014

The episode inflamed nationalist passions far beyond the stadium, with reports
of tension in the town of Mitrovica in northern Kosovo, which is divided between
ethnic Albanians and Serbs.

Video posted online on Tuesday night showed a crowd of Albanians responding in
kind to the chant they heard in Belgrade earlier in the evening, chanting,
''Kill! Kill! Kill Serbs!''

[Video: Albanians chanting "Kill Serbs!" on Tuesday night in the town of
Mitrovica in northern Kosovo. Watch on YouTube.]

Meanwhile in Tirana, the Albanian capital, fans waited to greet the players
returning from Belgrade as heroes, according to Albania's youth minister, Erion
Veliaj.

Tens of thousands celebrating proudly in Tirana & Mother Teresa Airport,
awaiting team Albania return from Belgrade pic.twitter.com/V83KqiF2tP -- Erion
Veliaj (@erionveliaj) October 14, 2014

Commenting on an image from the airport in Tirana, the Serbian blogger Vladan
Dukanovic observed that it seemed as if Albanians were ''determined to outdo us
in nationalist frenzy and stupidity.''

Aerodrom u Tirani. Nema Å¡ta, Albanci su definitivno odluÄili da nas pobijede u
ludilu nacionalnog zanosa i gluposti. pic.twitter.com/xP3UZj6Sl6 -- Vladan
ÄukanoviÄ++ (@VladanBa) October 15, 2014

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/15/world/europe/soccer-match-in-serbia-erupts-in-
riot-set-off-by-drone.html

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


