                             511 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           February 25, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

Hagel offers budget outline that would shrink the Army

BYLINE: Ernesto LondoÃ±o

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 851 words


The Defense Department on Monday proposed cutting the Army to its smallest size
in 74 years, slashing a class of attack jets and rolling back personnel costs in
an effort to adjust a department buoyed by a decade of war to an era of leaner
budgets.

The five-year budget blueprint outlined by Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel
reflects a willingness by the Pentagon to make deep cuts to personnel strength
to invest in technology and equipment as it eases off a war footing.

"The development and proliferation of more advanced military technologies by
other nations mean that we are entering an era where American dominance on the
seas, in the skies and in space can no longer be taken for granted," Hagel told
reporters at an afternoon news conference.

Congress recently passed a bill that authorized the Defense Department to spend
nearly $1 trillion over the next two years - $75 billion less than the Obama
administration requested but a reprieve from the spending cuts that would have
been forced under the deficit-reduction mechanism known as sequestration.

The Pentagon's budget-trimming plan represents the department's opening bid in
what is widely expected to be a politically fraught process that lawmakers and
influential constituencies will seek to shape. The formal budget will be
presented next Tuesday.

Under the proposal, during the next five years the Pentagon would get $115
billion above the savings it would have had to find under sequestration but $113
billion less than the spending levels contemplated in last year's budget
proposal.

Gordon Adams, a defense budget expert at American University who served in the
Clinton administration, said the new proposal was more realistic than the one
the department articulated a year ago. But he warned that Pentagon officials
would be wise to plan for sequestration-level budgets for some time to come.

"The international threat environment doesn't drive you to higher levels, and
the Republican Party is split on the issue and disinclined to go higher," he
said.

The most startling part of the plan is the proposal to cut the active-duty Army
to between 440,000 and 450,000 soldiers, from a wartime peak of 570,000 - which
would reduce the force to its smallest size since before World War II.

Officials warned that if sequestration-level cuts remain in place as of 2016,
the Army would be forced to trim down to 420,000 - a level they called
unacceptable.

Army Secretary John M. McHugh said in a statement that the proposed cuts
"provided equal doses of reality and opportunity," but he acknowledged that the
downsizing would "be a difficult road."

The most contentious part of the plan is likely to be proposed cuts to pay and
benefits, including rolling back tax-free housing allowances and the level of
subsidies offered by stores in military bases.

"No realistic effort to find further significant savings can avoid dealing with
military compensation," Hagel said.

Veterans groups and lawmakers pushed back on some of those proposals Monday,
calling them particularly unfair after a decade of intense combat deployments.

"Washington is trying to balance the budget on the backs of those who have
sacrificed the most," said Paul Rieckhoff, the founder of Iraq and Afghanistan
Veterans of America. "We know the Defense Department must make difficult budget
decisions, but these cuts would hit service members, making it harder for them
and their families to make ends meet."

The Pentagon proposed eliminating its fleet of A-10 Thunderbolt II attack
planes, which it said would save $3.5 billion over the next five years. It also
plans to retire the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft and use Global Hawk drones
instead. Hagel said, however, that the department would slow the growth of its
drone fleet. He said the drones have been effective against terrorist targets
but "cannot operate in the face of enemy aircraft and modern air defenses."

Hagel warned Monday that the Pentagon would work more assertively to shut down
bases it views as obsolete - an effort that has long been stymied by members of
Congress who have protected facilities and jobs in their jurisdictions.

"If Congress continues to block these requests even as they slash the overall
budget, we will have to consider every tool at our disposal to reduce
infrastructure," Hagel said.

For fiscal 2015, the Pentagon will be requesting $26 billion over the amount
appropriated in the recent spending bill, as part of a broader security
initiative the Obama administration will announce next week in greater detail.

A key omission in Hagel's speech Monday was the future of the overseas
contingency operations fund, which in recent years has served as the base budget
for the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

A Defense Department official said the department's budget request next week
will include a "placeholder" request for roughly $80 billion, the same level of
funding the war budget got in fiscal 2014. The official said a revised figure
would be submitted when the administration has clarity on whether it will keep a
troop contingent in Afghanistan past 2014.

ernesto.londono@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


