                             526 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             July 10, 2014 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

Social media and film festival come to a sci-fi cult hit's rescue

BYLINE: David Montgomery

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1015 words


A science-fiction thriller about immigration and drone warfare sounds like a
mash-up ripped from today's headlines.

Except that director Alex Rivera started writing "Sleep Dealer" in the late
1990s. It premiered in 2008 at the Sundance Film Festival,  where it won an
award for outstanding screenwriting (shared with co-writer David Riker).

The film started appearing in art houses and festivals - including local
screenings at the AFI Silver Theatre and the Cultural Center of the
Inter-American Development Bank - and getting admiring reviews.

Then, poof! "Sleep Dealer" all but disappeared. The film's distributor went out
of business, and it never got a proper commercial release. It fell to
bootleggers and academics to cherish and share the film.

"It's been the pirates and the professors who have kept this film alive for the
last half-decade," Rivera says.

Now an unusual effort is underway to rescue "Sleep Dealer" from oblivion - and
it may prove to be a model for disseminating other worthy films that have been
blocked from the usual industry channels.

First, a three-year-old project of the Sundance Institute called #ArtistServices
recently selected "Sleep Dealer" to be one of the films it would support by
facilitating digital distribution deals with iTunes, Amazon and, soon, Netflix.

Then, a grass-roots network of the film's supporters plus a couple of dozen
progressive groups interested in the film's themes began promoting "Sleep
Dealer" on social media. One of the more prominent members of the campaign is
Van Jones, co-host of "Crossfire" on CNN and a former green-jobs adviser in the
Obama White House.

"I just started calling my friends everywhere," Jones says in an e-mail. "I
said, 'This guy [Rivera] has rescued this amazing film from the corporate trash
bin. This time, we need to make sure everyone sees it.'"

Jones, who calls himself "a science-fiction geek," says he missed sci-fi flicks
that "tackled the serious issues - like race, immigration, class. . . . Then
'Sleep Dealer' blew me away. I thought this movie could seed a whole new
category of film - social justice sci-fi."

If the digital distribution campaign succeeds, the movie's supporters say they
will arrange for on-demand screenings in theaters.

"Today we are debating drones, jobs and the child refugee crisis at our southern
border," Jones says. " 'Sleep Dealer' puts a human face on all of these issues."

Not that heavy themes overwhelm the story. The character Memo Cruz (played by
actor Luis Fernando PeÃ±a) leaves the barren fields of his Mexican farming
village, where the water has been dammed by a corporation for use elsewhere. He
goes to Tijuana, where he seeks a "coyotek" - a play on "coyote," one who
smuggles undocumented immigrants. The coyotek gives him a "node job" so he can
become a "cybracero." The nodes implanted in his muscles allow him to plug into
one of the borderland's virtual factories, where workers make the physical
motions that remotely control robots in gleaming American cities. The robots are
constructing skyscrapers, cleaning houses, cutting grass.

"This is the American Dream," explains a character. "We give the United States
what they always wanted: all the work, without the workers."

The pay is better than the wages in poor villages, but the work saps the
workers' energy and spirit, until they collapse from exhaustion, which is why
the virtual sweatshops are called "sleep dealers."

Another character is Luz (Leonor Varela), a struggling Mexican writer who uses
her node job to sell her uploaded memories online to survive. She befriends
Memo. An unknown virtual customer is especially interested in buying memories
about Memo.

And then there is Rudy (Jacob Vargas), a Mexican American in the United States
who works as a remote controller of drones that attack suspected
"aqua-terrorists" in Memo's village. What drives the suspense is how these three
lives intertwine. (The Mexican characters speak Spanish, with English
subtitles.)

The film grew from Rivera's fascination with paradoxes we take for granted:
Borders that are militarized yet porous. People who are present in their
absence, such as immigrants Skyping people back home, or warriors guiding
missiles from the comfort of an office.

"Science fiction lets you take the world that is very familiar, and by just
exaggerating it or tweaking it a little, you can make that familiar world seem
very strange," Rivera says.

Rivera filmed "Sleep Dealer" in parts of Mexico where families still obtain
water from a well with a bucket, yet they have satellite dishes to pull in
international television. The whole world has a future, yet "Sleep Dealer" is
one of the first science-fiction films largely set in the underdeveloped parts -
a milestone in film history.

"I was inspired by 'Star Wars' as much as by 'El Norte,' " says Rivera,
referring to the seminal 1983 immigration drama.

Rivera, 41, grew up in Wappingers Falls, N.Y. His father immigrated from Peru.
The director's first film was called "PapapapÃ¡," which compared the journey of
his father to that of a potato and explored the mental space inhabited by his
father, suspended somewhere between Lima and New York. The English synonym for
father, "papa," is "papÃ¡" in Spanish, and "potato" is "papa."

Now based in Los Angeles, Rivera recently has been making poetic music videos
about the struggle for immigrant rights, featuring artists including La Santa
Cecilia, Aloe Blacc and Manu Chao. He is developing a feature film about Chicano
activist Reies LÃ³pez Tijerina, who fought to restore land rights in New Mexico
to the descendants of Mexican families.

Such themes are embedded in "Sleep Dealer." Before setting out on his virtual
migration, Memo quarrels with his father, who wants him to stay in their
hopeless cornfield. The old man asks, "Is our future a thing of the past?"

By the end, a wiser, wearier Memo earns the bittersweet hope of protagonists in
so many immigrant dramas, imagined and real: "Maybe there's a future for me
here, on the edge of everything. A future with a past. If I connect. And fight."

David.Montgomery@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


