                             566 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                         (The Public Editor's Journal)

                            February 14, 2014 Friday

Welcome Words: Why The Times Bucked the Government on a Drone Strike Story

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 424 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Newly appointed Washington bureau chief wants to &#8220;give readers
as much information as possible&#8221; on a possible lethal strike against an
American in Pakistan.


The United States is considering a drone strike to kill an American with alleged
terrorist ties.   That's a pretty big deal - shocking to those of us who haven't
become completely inured to such news.

When The Times reported the story earlier this week, it also reported the
American's location -  Pakistan.   Not every news outlet reported that.  The
Associated Press, for example, acknowledged withholding the country's name
because "officials said publishing it could interrupt ongoing counterterrorism
operations." (The Los Angeles Times seems to have been first to name Pakistan.)

The Times's newly appointed Washington bureau chief, Carolyn Ryan, explained The
Times's decision in an email to Michael Calderone, the excellent media reporter
at The Huffington Post.   (The decision, undoubtedly, was made in consultation
with The Times's top editors.)

She wrote:

We take every request from the government seriously, but I worry that their
requests to withhold information have become almost blanket policy.  In this
case, the government has said only generally that publication of the country in
which the American is living would interfere with their ongoing counter terror
operations.  When they made the request to us, we pressed them for more of an
explanation, and they never responded.  What's more, the Obama Administration
has made it very clear that it is going to target anyone in Pakistan who is
affiliated with Al Qaeda, so that certainly should come as no surprise to any
such person hiding out in Pakistan."

Most important, Ms. Ryan defended the decision as squarely in the interests of
Times readers.

"When we are describing a debate over killing an American citizen," she said, "I
think it's important to give readers as much information as possible about the
circumstances surrounding that debate."

The Times has sometimes been too willing to accept government requests to
withhold information from citizens.  I criticized one such decision last year,
and have written about the overall tendency several times.

Yes, news organizations have to take such requests seriously.  But they also
have to push back, especially when the stakes are so high and the contemplated
actions so questionable.  (Due process, anyone?)

David Firestone, writing incisively in the editorial page blog "Taking Note,"
objects to the secrecy - even from Congress - in which President Obama's drone
program operates.

This week's decision by The Times was a sound and carefully determined one, and
Ms. Ryan's articulation of the reasons made me want to cheer.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


