                             574 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Lens)

                             August 5, 2014 Tuesday

Looking for the Enduring Photo in Gaza

BYLINE: JAMES ESTRIN

SECTION: MULTIMEDIA

LENGTH: 1329 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Tyler Hicks, a Times photographer who covered the first two weeks of
the conflict in Gaza, spoke about his experiences.


Tyler Hicks, a New York Times staff photographer, covered Gaza during the first
two weeks of the current conflict. He spoke about that experience in a phone
interview with James Estrin. The conversation has been edited.

Mr. Hicks won the Pulitzer Prize for Breaking News Photography in 2014 for his
coverage of the massacre at the Westgate Mall in Nairobi, Kenya. He was also a
member of the team that won the Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting in
2009 for coverage of Afghanistan and Pakistan.

 Q.

When did you arrive in Gaza, and what was it like to cover this conflict?

A.

I arrived in Gaza City at the very beginning of the conflict, and I was there
for two weeks. The last time I had been there was two years ago and in a very
similar circumstance, but one that was resolved after only a week of fighting. I
was hoping that would be the case this time around, but as we have seen, this
time it has been much more intense with more casualties and a much more
prolonged campaign.

My memories of the civilian casualties from two years ago are still fresh, but
that experience could not prepare me for the civilian casualties in this current
crisis. Obviously, when you are covering a war, you are with one side or the
other. It is very difficult to try to cover both sides.

I was stationed in Gaza, and covered the Palestinian side of the war where you
saw most of the casualties. One of the reasons for that is because the Hamas
fighters are living among the civilian population. Where you have a separate
army that is fighting from a front line, it is easy to differentiate between
soldiers and civilians.

This is a situation where the fighters fire rockets from all over the Gaza
Strip, from neighborhoods to cemeteries, from parking lots, from any number of
places. They move quickly and then retaliation often comes quickly from Israel.
That retaliation can be very severe, hitting residential neighborhoods, homes,
killing and injuring scores of women and children.

Q.

We have many photos of the casualties and destruction in Gaza. Why don't we have
many photos of Hamas fighters or missiles?

A.

This is a war fought largely behind the scenes. Hamas fighters are not able to
expose themselves. If they were to even step a foot on the street they would be
spotted by an Israeli drone and immediately blown up. We don't see those
fighters. They are operating out of buildings and homes and at night. They are
moving around very carefully. You don't see any signs of authority on the
streets. If you can imagine every police officer, every person of authority in
America gone, this is what that would look like.

If we had access to them, we would be photographing them. I never saw a single
device for launching the rockets to Israel. It's as if they don't exist.

Sometimes people assume that you can have access to everything, that you can see
everything. But the fighters are virtually invisible to us. What we do as
photographers is document what we can to show that side of the war. There are
funerals, there are people being rushed to the hospital, but you can't
differentiate the fighters from the civilians. They are not wearing uniforms. If
there is someone coming into the hospital injured, you can't tell if that's just
a shopkeeper or if this is someone who just fired a rocket towards Israel. It's
impossible to know who's who. We tried to cover this as objectively as possible.

Q.

Who were you working with when you were in Gaza?

A.

I was working with a driver who I had also worked with a few years ago, and who
I trust and who has the skills to get to these scenes quickly. It's all about
getting information quickly and getting there quickly.

Our routine is that he could come and meet me in my hotel as early as possible.
But early mornings tend to be the most dangerous places to move around, because
there is no one driving around at that time. However, there are a lot of Israeli
drones and jets overhead. Being the only moving car on the ground means you are
the only moving target on the ground. This is a major concern.

The reasons for going out early is because a lot of the bombs happen overnight,
so it's important to get out to these areas at first light to see the
destruction and to get it out to the public. You have to balance this.

Q.

This is your third Gaza conflict. And you also covered the Israeli war in
Lebanon. Does it feel like you're likely to be back?

A.

Unfortunately, it does feel like I will be back there again. This current
conflict, more than any, has proven how little negotiating room there is. I have
lost count of how many cease-fires there have been that have fallen apart or
never even taken affect.

Q.

You've talked bout how important it is to remember what you witnessed and not to
forget. Why is that important?

A.

Any time I cover something as intense as what I've seen in Gaza, there is a
single event that really stays, that is burned into your memory. You can go for
weeks or longer of seeing horrible scenes everyday, but there will be one that
really stays with you. In this case it was when four young boys were killed on
the beach (slide 8).

I was in my room in a modest hotel in Gaza City when I heard a loud explosion
near the window. I looked outside and saw terrified children running away from
the explosion.

Just as I was grabbing my protective clothing and helmet, a second explosion
came again. I could see that the very children I had seen running away from that
initial explosion were now dead on the beach. To see young boys running for
their lives and then a moment later they're dead is something I will never
forget.

Normally we arrive after the fact to see the aftermath. In this case it was
unfolding in front of me.

Q.

What did you accomplish while you were there?

A.

I try to take photos that are going to bring recognition to a situation that
needs attention. There are a lot of photographers in Gaza. There are very
talented local Palestinian photographers who have grown up with these conflicts.
And there is also the foreign press that comes there only when something is
going on.

So I ask myself, what contribution am I making as an individual when I show up
and there are 10 other photographers on the scene? How are my photos going to
make a difference compared to the others'?

My goal is to find that specific image that is going to have a lasting affect.
For me it was a man running with a lifeless body of a boy on the beach. That one
photograph was my contribution of my two weeks there. It's like distilling
everything down to one photo or one scene that you photograph.

I have spent many years working in Afghanistan throughout the war there. I
always felt that if I had spent a month out on patrols with the Americans and I
had one day of work - one small set of photographs - that I felt were important,
then that was a successful trip.

I try to look at this not in terms of time but what photograph will stay with
people. If you look back at even the most famous photographers that have ever
lived, there are only a handful of photographs that you can say made a
difference, that brought awareness.

Q.

You've spent a lot of your professional life in conflict zones.

A.

In some ways the payoff can be very little. It's a lot of time spent in the
field to try to bring that awareness. If I look back at the past decade, I might
pick out only 10 pictures that I felt are really important.

There are a lot of photographs that tell pieces of a story, but those really
important photos are very rare and are what we strive for. There's a lot of
patience and a lot of work involved in it. People often ask me how is it that
you are always in a place where bad things are happening. The answer is just
time. You spend a lot of time working and being there and eventually you will
get the opportunity to document something that will have a lasting impression.

Follow @TylerHicksPhoto, @JamesEstrin and @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Lens is also
on Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


