                             571 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            June 11, 2014 Wednesday

Today in Small Business: Why Getting an S.B.A. Loan May Get Easier

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 677 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â And a study suggests that business owners may be better off not
taking venture capital.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

Wholesale inventories rise.

May's small-business optimism index hits its highest level since September 2007,
according to the National Federation of Independent Business.

Job openings climb to their highest level in seven years.

For the first time since early 2010, the risk of European investment-grade
credit is lower than that of the United States.

Finance

Here are six tips from Kickstarter on how to run a successful fund-raising
campaign on its platform.

The Small Business Administration wants to make it easier and faster for small
business owners to get loans of $350,000 or less.

Entrepreneurs are better off taking less venture capital, a study shows.

Newly engaged couples and their parents are turning to financial advisers for
help in planning the wedding.

Management

When the chief executive gets arrested, it's bad for business.

Here are a few tips for your next contract negotiations and some advice on
winning an argument.

One of the biggest mistakes business owners make when selling a business,
according to this expert, is underestimating the value of a qualified adviser.

Manufacturing profits have stalled for five reasons.

An infographic explains why your business can't afford to upset its customers.

Three tips for keeping your business prepared for emergencies.

Employees

Here's how two small businesses in San Jose, Calif., are coping with a rise in
the minimum wage.

Waffle House reportedly denied an employee a $1,000 tip because it wasn't in
cash.

Entrepreneurship

Constant Contact announces the inaugural class of its small-business innovation
program.

Michael Dell is named a global advocate for entrepreneurship by the United
Nations Foundation.

The first company backed by a venture fund for student entrepreneurs has been
acquired.

Marketing

Careers are made or broken at the weeklong annual Cannes Lions advertising
festival, where attendance can cost up to $200,000 per person.

This innovative ad aims to persuade people to stop texting while driving.

Washington

The president signed a $12.3 billion water projects bill, financing improvements
including a harbor expansion in Boston and flood control in Iowa and North
Dakota.

Some are worried that the Food and Drug Administration's new ban is terrible for
America's artisan cheese industry.

The Federal Aviation Administration gives BP permission to fly the United
States' first commercial drone over land.

Online

Five important reasons small businesses need a mobile-optimized website.

Amazon may introduce a new marketplace this year to connect local services and
products (and this could be the delivery drone).

Mobile

Three small businesses that switched successfully to mobile.

Health Care

The Obama administration will allow 18 states to delay implementing part of the
small-business health insurance exchange until 2016.

Taxes

The Internal Revenue Service adopts a taxpayer bill of rights.

Around the country

In downtown Albuquerque, N.M., business owners are fed up with problems caused
by homeless people.

Quirkiness is thriving in some Southeast Texas shops.

The sprawling, booming Los Angeles tech scene "is having a moment."

Milk prices in Missouri have significantly increased in the last yearas the
number of farms dwindles.

Niagara Falls business owners are pushing back on paying for the city's new
refuse and recycling program.

Some Georgians say it's time to legalize card rooms in the state.

Around the World

A husband-wife team operates Canada's only private clinic for hip and knee
replacement.

This building in Dresden produces music when it rains.

Technology

Backup battery packs take as little as 15 minutes to top up your smartphone.

Salesforce.com wants to bring wearable devices to the workplace.

A movie theater chain has banned the use of Google Glass during films.

Feedly and Evernote go down as attackers demand ransom.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


