                             590 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 11, 2014 Friday 1:33 AM EST

The United States must advance a Mideast policy based on collaboration;
The U.S. must spearhead a Mideast policy based on collaboration.

BYLINE: Jane Harman

LENGTH: 879 words


What, exactly, does the United States stand for in the Middle East? More
important, what would the average Iraqi, Syrian, Egyptian or Yemeni say that it
stands for? The suggestion that the United States is retrenching might seem
absurd, given that Yemenis can hear the buzz of drones overhead. The notion that
the United States is in the business of supporting democratic pluralism might
clash with their reading of our Egypt strategy or our will-they-or-won't-they
waffling over whether to actively support Syrian opposition fighters. Day by
day, with chaos blossoming, it becomes clearer that if we do have a strategic
narrative for the Middle East, we certainly have not articulated it effectively.
In marketing terms, we are not making the sale.

Other nations could be forgiven for failing to grasp our priorities and values.
"Don't do stupid [stuff] " may make sense to the American public, but it means
little to the rest of the world, and it means nothing to those vulnerable to the
evangelism of groups such as the Islamic State, now choosing between the
difficult work of politics and the terrible promise of jihad. What role will
U.S. foreign policy play in their choice? Have they come to see U.S. power as a
threat? Or have they seen firsthand the capacity of U.S. aid workers,
nongovernmental organizations and men and women in uniform to serve as partners
in their aspirations for a better life? If we don't think seriously about the
way our strategy plays out in the eyes and lives of such people - if we don't
think about the narrative - we will lose them for a generation.

This cuts to the core of the policy challenges we face in Iraq and Syria. Many
wonder, with good reason, how we can reliably identify moderates to arm and aid,
questioning whether today's moderates will turn out to be tomorrow's extremists.
We know with certainty, though, that the Islamic State and militant groups like
it will fill their ranks with those who have been given no reason to trust in
politics, let alone nonviolence. Preventing radicalization is difficult;
de-radicalizing hard-line believers is nearly impossible. So it is smart for
nations such as the United States, Turkey and Jordan to build relationships with
resistance leaders and invest in them as a tool to preempt extremism.

The United States, acting in coalition with regional partners, should offer a
better choice. Our commitment to this narrative must be active, visible and
credible, keeping in mind that the prison at Guantanamo Bay hobbles our pitch,
as torture did, and as the drone campaign threatens to do if it is not better
justified. It's not enough for U.S. policymakers to come down from the mountain
with stone tablets bearing the words "pluralism," "rule of law" and "human
rights."

While Adm. Mike Mullen was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he assigned
two staff members the task of drafting a new U.S. strategy. The result was "A
National Strategic Narrative," released publicly by the Wilson Center in 2011.
We protected the identities of its authors under the pseudonym Mr. Y, a nod to
George Kennan's outline for containment in his iconic "X-article." That
narrative seems prescient now for its description of the new strategic
environment - first and foremost, because it emphasized the need to work with
other nations to design a common approach in an open world. The narrative
rightly declared an end to an order in which the United States could seek
control and the beginning of a system in which we would need to compete for
influence. We need a foreign policy that reflects the bold clarity of these
findings.

The goal is a strategy shaped together with the Middle Eastern world: leaders
and peoples alike, borrowing the best impulses of the bottom-up Arab Spring and
the traditionally top-down U.S. approach to engagement. Our promise to the
Middle East must be one in which collaboration helps the people of the region
achieve shared values by a route of their own choice. Make no mistake: We risk
losing the argument. The Islamic State is mastering information warfare; it has
a savvy Twitter presence and a glossy newsletter that highlights battlefield
successes alongside - of all things - the work of its consumer protection
authority. It has declared a hasty, heady victory in pursuit of its ultimate
goal: the 7th-century caliphate restored. Its message has gained a frighteningly
broad Â­following.

What to do? Many perceive drones plus "don't do stupid [stuff]" is our foreign
policy, and it certainly isn't an adequate narrative. For every jihadist our
airstrikes might kill, left behind are scores of Iraqis and Syrians whose only
contact with the United States came by way of a Hellfire missile. Instead, we
need a "track two" surge, a dynamic partnership with Middle Eastern citizens
seeking stability, economic growth and freedom from corruption. Such a surge
would be international, drawing on the interests of neighboring states in
preventing the spread of extremism. It would also be a whole-government
initiative, drawing on considerable U.S. resources in the field of
peace-building.

The United States must put itself forward as the partner of choice, offering a
narrative of forward movement and a genuine lifeline to those slipping into the
grasp of jihad.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


