                             601 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                     August 27, 2014 Wednesday 6:06 PM EST

The consequences of a radical mindset on jihadist terror

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 620 words


In case you didn't have enough to worry about, there are signs that foreign
fighters are joining up with the Islamic State:

Douglas McAuthur McCain, of San Diego, California, was killed over the weekend
fighting for theÂ Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham (ISIS), according to the Free
Syrian Army. Photos of McCain's passport and of his body - which feature a
distinctive neck tattoo - have been seen by NBC News. According to an activist
linked to the Free Syrian Army who also saw the body and travel document, McCain
was among three foreign jihadis fighting with ISIS who died during the battle.

This should put radicals who object to effective anti-terrorism on defense. We
don't know whether this specific jihadist killed anyone, but he reportedly had
taken up arms in league with an enemy of the United States. So let's play out
what would happen at various stages in his evolution as a jihadist if
anti-government extremists got their way.

He almost certainly had some contact direct or indirect with terrorists or their
affiliates. It may have even been a mode of contact common to many foreign
jihadists. But if we rip out the National Security Agency surveillance program
or make it so cumbersome that intelligence officials can't detect developments
in real time, any chance to stop the jihadist wannabe before he left the country
would be lost. I suppose the libertarians would shrug and say that's acceptable.

Then suppose while he is still in training or running errands for his new
comrades in Syria, the United States gets whiff of his identity and has an
opportunity to take him out by drone. We have no forces on the ground (the
isolationist types are against that as well), but if we listen to the
libertarians and leftists, we can't touch him. Presumably we have to wait until
he is in battle and has already killed or maimed innocents. Or because he is an
American, do we have to go get a search warrant to arrest him? This sounds
bizarre - and it and the anti-drone crowd are just that.

Let's skip ahead. Perhaps the terrorist drifts into Iraq or territory controlled
by the Free Syrian Army. Rather than kill or extract information by torture (the
real kind that leaves permanent injury), the forces turn him over to the U.S.
military in Iraq or elsewhere. The "treat war like a crime" gang would
immediately read him his Miranda rights and ship him back into the United States
for trial. But the "evidence" against him does not pass muster under civilian
criminal justice standards, so he goes free. Or perhaps we get a conviction, but
without extracting valuable information that might save lives or help foil the
terrorists' operation. Too bad, I guess, for the victims of terror attacks that
might have been prevented. And then, of course, the convicted terrorist goes to
a U.S. prison, where he can inculcate other convicts with his jihadist
philosophy. They will be getting out, in many cases, rather soon. Now we have a
group of jihadists to worry about.

None of this is improbable. It is, however, the inevitable consequence of a
mindset that says we can't drone American jihadists overseas, can't set up an
efficient data collection system, can't interrogate jihadists without
Mirandizing them and can't put them in the Guantanamo Bay prison, where they can
be isolated from a civilian prison population. The pols need to acknowledge the
consequences of the policies they advocate - and then be held accountable by
voters for a disposition that needlessly incorporates civilian criminal justice
principles into war. But then again, many of these same folks don't think we are
at war or think we shouldn't be.

What, then, do they favor - more ambulances for the next 9/11-type attack on the
homeland?

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


