                             627 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      January 7, 2014 Tuesday 8:14 PM EST

Dynamic violin-piano duo offers exquisite intimacy at Phillips

BYLINE: Anne Midgette

SECTION: Style; Pg. C02

LENGTH: 705 words


The Phillips Collection was once a private home. On Sunday afternoon, the
violinist Pekka Kuusisto and the composer-pianist Nico Muhly used it to offer a
world-class house concert.

Technically speaking, it wasn't a house concert. It was the usual Phillips
Collection Sunday afternoon performance. But the two musicians brought a sense
of such intimacy and spontaneity that a listener felt more a participant than a
passive recipient. Each movement of Bach's second partita, for instance, began
as if it were a completely fresh idea that happened to have struck Kuusisto as
he stood by the piano. Each progressed as if he were thinking his way through
it, musing on what might come next. This music felt every bit as new as the two
works by Muhly, one a four-movement essay ("Drones & Violin"), one a shorter
sally ("Drones & Piano").

And it's a rare performer who can polish off the Chaconne, the final movement of
the second partita and one of the towering monuments of the violin repertory,
and then flip his Guadagnini around and start strumming it like a banjo as he
sings Finnish folk songs. Indeed, it's a rare performer who can make you want to
listen to a Finnish folk song after you've heard the Bach - something of which
Kuusisto was perfectly aware. "It's worth staying for," he told the audience,
drawing a laugh.

It was an exquisitely balanced program. Each Bach movement was answered with a
work by a living composer, all presented as flip sides of the same coin - so
that the end of the Bach Gigue, an exhalation, was immediately followed by the
inhalation of the start of Muhly's second "Drones" piece, in a seamless
continuum.

Kuusisto got the attention of Washington audiences with his performances of the
Lindberg violin concerto last year with the National Symphony Orchestra. But he
didn't play like a soloist here - more like a poet. The initial movements of the
Bach were free of preconceptions about beauty or evenness of sound; they were,
instead, an expressive sequence of meditations. They were thus perfectly
calibrated to Arvo PÃ¤rt's "Fratres" - one of many versions of this quiet,
intricate work, which drifts and tangles a sequence of variations around a
six-bar theme. And it yielded naturally to Philip Glass's "The Orchard," in
which Muhly's buoyant, elastic playing lent an extra urgency to the repeated
three-note skipping figure in the piano.

Muhly is well known as a composer, having most recently made waves when the
Metropolitan Opera opened his "Two Boys" last fall. Both of his pieces here were
excellent - and they brought his arresting pianism, a less-known arrow in his
quiver, to the fore. In a program that had been characterized by repeating
patterns, drifting notes and a sense of restraint, the piano suddenly thundered
out in a fortissimo, tearing open the mood of the afternoon, revealing a
Romantic heart within the afternoon's patterned, shifting, gentle musical idiom.
After the outbursts, Muhly scaled back down, promptly - nothing to see here,
folks - but his playing was still all bright colors and high contrasts, albeit
hidden in the shades of the dappled musical landscape of the performance as a
whole.

Kuusisto, too, couldn't help showing his hand as a brilliant player, even if the
afternoon - by his admission to the audience - was not designed to showcase
virtuosity. In the Bach Gigue, between the two Muhly pieces, the quick
fingerwork unsheathed a clean, firm sound, like a swordblade, gleaming with
light. And the Chaconne partook of both the brilliance and the subtlety.

Often, the final pieces on a program, particularly if they're in a performer's
own language, convey a sense of relaxation, a look behind the curtain. But the
two improvisations on Finnish folk songs that ended this performance seemed
rather a seamless extension of an eclectic yet perfectly organic collection of
music. The curtain had been down all along. So if Kuusisto chose to strum on his
violin and burst into song while Muhly wandered along the edge of a precipice on
the keyboard beside him, it was the most reasonable thing in the world. More
concerts should end this way - and start this way, and continue this way. If
only more musicians were able to pull it off.

anne.midgette@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


