                             650 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        July 13, 2014 Sunday 1:55 AM EST

Marijuana shop in Seattle runs out of supplies in just three days

SECTION: A section; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 361 words


WASHINGTON STATE          Democrat pulls shotgun video

Estakio Beltran, a Democrat running for Congress in conservative central
Washington, on Saturday removed an online campaign video that showed him
blasting an elephant-shaped pi√±ata with a shotgun.

The advertisement generated a lot of criticism after it was posted last week,
including from a group founded by former Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, the Arizona
Democrat who survived a gunshot wound to the head in 2011.

- Associated Press

NEW JERSEY          Another Atlantic City casino may close

The Trump Plaza Hotel in Atlantic City could shut its doors in September and lay
off 1,000 workers, a local newspaper reported, in what would make it one of four
casinos to close this year in the faltering New Jersey resort city.

The Press of Atlantic City reported that an official from Trump Plaza called New
Jersey state Sen. Jim Whelan (D) and told him the casino expected to issue
layoff notices on Monday.

- Reuters

Seattle's only marijuana shop runs out, after just 3 days:Cannabis City,
Seattle's first and only recreational marijuana store, temporarily closed after
running out of stock in just three days since Washington became the second U.S.
state to allow pot sales to adults. The store opened on Tuesday, the first day
of legal sales in the state, with a 10-pound supply.

Authorities say Utah man planned bombing, uprising:Authorities in Utah have
arrested a man in connection with an alleged plot to blow up a police station,
kill police officers and destroy infrastructure to delay an emergency response.
John Huggins, 47, believed that the plan, once carried out, would spark an
anti-government uprising, according to court documents.

FAA investigates drones used to shoot videos of fireworks:The Federal Aviation
Administration is investigating several videos filmed using drones that flew
into and around firework displays, including two apparently shot on the Fourth
of July and one from Florida that has received nearly 9 million YouTube views.
The agency allows drone use for recreational purposes under certain
restrictions.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


