                             665 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     October 29, 2014 Wednesday 2:56 AM EST

Mobile ads boost Facebook revenue

SECTION: A section; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 777 words


EARNINGS          Mobile ads boost Facebook revenue

Facebook grew its advertising revenue by 64 percent in the third quarter, helped
by a boost in mobile ads that are becoming an increasingly large chunk of the
social networking giant's overall advertising business.

Advertising revenue at the company totaled $2.96 billion. Mobile ad revenue, a
closely watched figure, was $1.95 billion, or 66 percent of Facebook's total
advertising revenue for the quarter. That's up from 62 percent in the second
quarter and 59 percent in the first three months of the year. The 10-year-old
company began offering mobile ads in 2012.

Now, Facebook is expanding into highly lucrative video ads, and earlier this
year relaunched Atlas, a tool for marketers to better target people across
"devices, platforms and publishers" and to measure how well the ads work.

Facebook had 1.35 billion average monthly users as of Sept. 30, an increase of
14 percent from a year earlier. Daily users totaled 864 million, up 19 percent.
Mobile monthly active users, meanwhile, were 1.12 billion, up 29 percent from a
year earlier.

Overall, Facebook earned $802 million after paying preferred dividends, or 30
cents per share, on revenue of $3.2 billion. Adjusted earnings and revenue beat
Wall Street's estimates.

- Associated Press

ALSO IN BUSINESS

l              Strong corporate earnings pushed up stocks Tuesday. Whirlpool,
AutoNation and engine-maker Cummins all rose 7 percent after reporting their
results. The S&P 500-stock index rose 23.42 points, or 1.2 percent, to 1985.05.
It's now just 26.31 points short of its Sept. 18 record close of 2011.36. The
Dow Jones industrial average rose 187.81 points, or 1.1 percent, to 17,005.75.
The Nasdaq composite climbed 78.36 points, or 1.7 percent, to 4564.29. The
biggest gain was in the Russell 2000, a small stock index. It jumped 2.9
percent.

l              New York City's bike-sharing systemis getting new owners who say
they'll double its size in the next three years. A private investor group headed
by the chief executive of real estate firm Related is buying Alta Bicycle Share
and will move its headquarters from Portland, Ore., to New York. Alta runs the
Washington area's Capital Bikeshare as well as New York's Citi Bike and programs
in Chicago, Boston, Toronto and other cities.

l              Japanese telecommunications company SoftBankwill invest $627
million in Indiane-retailer Snapdeal.com to tap the country's growing online
market. SoftBank's Internet and Media unit also will lead an investment of $210
million in ANI Technologies, which runs the Ola Cabs taxi booking service that
competes with Uber Technologies, the Tokyo-based company said in two separate
statements. India's e-commerce industry will grow sevenfold to $22 billion by
2018, according to CLSA Asia Pacific Markets.

l              General Motors will move productionof the electric-drive unit for
the next-generation Chevrolet Volt to Michigan from Mexico and plans to announce
almost $300 million in investment in the state this year. The automaker will
build the electric drive in Warren, the company said in a statement. GM said it
has invested about $1.82 billion in projects in the state dedicated to vehicle
electrification.

l              Business and group travelis on the rise, and that has been good
news for Marriott's bottom line. Profit at the Bethesda-based hotel company rose
20 percent during the third quarter, fueled by a resurgence in conference
business, continued growth in the Middle East and Africa, and higher nightly
rates around the world. Marriott's earnings climbed to $192 million, or 65 cents
per share, during the third quarter, up from $160 million, or 52 cents per
share, a year earlier. Revenue, meanwhile, increased 9.5 percent, to $3.46
billion.

l              Operators who fly dronesor model planes near or over large sports
stadiums and auto racetracks are breaking the law and can be fined and
imprisoned for up to a year, the Federal Aviation Administration warned in a
notice posted on the agency's Web site. The notice marks the first time the FAA
has sought to criminalize the use of drones and model planes, attorneys
representing drone users said.

- From staff reports, news services

Coming Today

l              2 p.m.:Federal Reserve's FOMC meeting announcement.

l              Earnings:Goodyear, Visa, Wellpoint.

LIVESTOCK

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


