                             675 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 20, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Legacy in the Balance On Surveillance Policies

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER; Jeremy W. Peters contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1136 words


WASHINGTON -- For President Obama, the proposed overhaul of the American
surveillance state confronts him with a fundamental choice: Will he become the
commander in chief many expected in 2008 or remain the one he became in 2009? Or
is there a balance in between?

At the heart of the report by a White House advisory group is a challenge to Mr.
Obama's conception of his presidency. A candidate who promised to reverse what
he saw as excesses in the war against terrorists wound up preserving and even
amplifying many of the policies he inherited. With his last election behind him,
he is being challenged to decide if that is still the right approach.

''Whether he implements these recommendations will go a long way toward
determining the legacy of his presidency,'' said Anthony D. Romero, the
executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union. ''My own sense is the
president is deeply conflicted about where's the right place to end up. He's
still at his core a constitutional lawyer who understands the importance of
these issues, but the realpolitik of the office set in rather quickly.''

Developed in response to the revelations by a former National Security Agency
contractor, Edward J. Snowden, the report urged the president to ratchet back
the expansive intelligence apparatus that evolved under President George W. Bush
and continued to grow under Mr. Obama. In effect, the 46 recommendations would
constrain some of the autonomy the N.S.A. has come to enjoy and force greater
attention to privacy and civil liberties concerns.

But Mr. Obama must decide whether such a recalibration would unreasonably
increase the risk of terrorists slipping through the surveillance net. For all
of his campaign speeches, that was a risk he was not willing to take once in
office. Yet in recent months, he has discussed eventually ending the war on
terrorism.

The report in some ways captures Mr. Obama's internal conflicts. After Mr.
Snowden began leaking information about secret programs, Mr. Obama initially
seemed surprised that the public did not trust him to use them appropriately.

Over the weeks and months that followed, according to both public statements and
advisers who have spoken with him privately, he seemed to pivot more toward the
notion that greater trust had to be built into the system. The report, which he
plans to take with him when he leaves Friday for vacation in Hawaii, represents
''kind of who he would be if he were not in the position he was in,'' one
adviser said.

''My sense is that on the one hand, the president's own personal instincts are
reasonably civil libertarian in general and that in his heart of hearts he
resonates with the call for more aggressive protection of privacy and individual
liberty,'' said the adviser, who requested anonymity to discuss Mr. Obama's
thinking. ''On the other hand, my sense is that like every president, when he
finds himself ultimately responsible for the safety of the nation, the stakes
get raised in ways one can barely imagine.''

How much Mr. Obama embraces the report seems uncertain. He has already rejected
a recommendation to separate the leadership of the N.S.A. and the United States
Cyber Command. But after appointing the group and making its report public, Mr.
Obama will be hard pressed not to adopt some of it.

''How does a president say, 'I disagree with my review group'?'' asked Michael
Allen, a former Bush aide and author of ''Blinking Red,'' a new book on the
creation of the intelligence architecture after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
''It needs to be seen at the very least as, 'I'm largely or in some nonsymbolic
way taking most of what they're offering.' ''

Mr. Allen, now managing director of Beacon Global Strategies, said such pressure
may cause Mr. Obama to go too far and open the country up to more danger. ''I
fear they will say something like, 'We need to make a major course correction,'
'' he said.

Mr. Obama came into office having run against Mr. Bush's first term but
inheriting his second. Before leaving office, Mr. Bush had already moderated his
counterterrorism program in hopes that it would survive his presidency. He
stopped waterboarding, emptied secret C.I.A. prisons, transferred many prisoners
at Guant√°namo Bay, Cuba, and secured bipartisan legislation on detention,
interrogation and surveillance.

When he took over, Mr. Obama made further adjustments but kept much of the
program intact and, when it came to drone strikes, even expanded it. His
thinking was further shaped during his first presidential Christmas in Hawaii,
when an extremist tried to take down an airliner with explosives in his
underwear.

''I think Obama in some ways is more authoritarian than Bush on these privacy
issues,'' said Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, a Republican critic who said
disclosures about N.S.A. programs were far more alarming than he had ever
anticipated.

White House officials reject such characterizations, but the momentum to revamp
N.S.A. rules comes at a time when Mr. Obama also faces other decisions on how
much to shift course. Allies are pressing him to support the release of a
comprehensive Senate report on the history of interrogations and torture. The
president is also left to decide how much to scale back drone strikes as he
signaled he planned to do in a speech this year.

Adm. Dennis C. Blair, Mr. Obama's first director of national intelligence, said
the president should take a deeper look at national security policies beyond
simply surveillance. ''Appointing this commission on one small aspect of an
important issue for American democracy is a typical small-ball play by this
administration,'' he said. ''When the administration asks for a debate, it
doesn't really want it. What we need is a debate about what level of security we
want traded off against what level of privacy we want to maintain.''

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said Mr. Obama has been too passive
in explaining his rationale to the public. ''Most presidents would have now
given a speech and said, 'O.K., here's what the recommendations are; here's what
I think we ought to do,' '' Mr. McCain said. ''Instead, it just came out.
There's not a translation of facts and events to remedies that the president
supports.''

Jay Carney, the White House press secretary, said that Mr. Obama will do that in
January after digesting the report. The review, Mr. Carney said, ''reflects a
view here that we can and should make changes that are consistent with our need
to maintain security for the United States and the American people and our
allies, to combat the threats that exist, but that allow for us to provide more
assurance to the American people that there are safeguards against abuse and
that there is oversight in place.''

Where he will fall along that spectrum will be decided on the beaches of Oahu.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/20/us/a-legacy-in-the-balance-on-surveillance-pol
icies.html

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A White House advisory group's report on surveillance poses a
challenge to Barack Obama's conception of his presidency. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
GABRIELLA DEMCZUK/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


