                             670 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 1, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghans Assail Karzai's Disparate Views on Killings

BYLINE: By ROD NORDLAND; Alissa J. Rubin and Habib Zahori contributed reporting
from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1066 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- As so often happens in the fog of war, the attack in a
village in Kandahar on Friday missed the enemy patrol that was its intended
target, instead killing an 8-year-old boy and wounding two other children.

President Hamid Karzai was silent about the civilian casualties, although just
the day before he had responded with fury to a similar attack in Helmand
Province, which also killed one child and gravely wounded two women.

The attack he complained about was carried out by the American-led coalition and
used a drone. The attack he ignored was by the Taliban and used a suicide
bomber.

The bomber had targeted an American military patrol in the Daman district but
detonated prematurely -- killing only himself and the boy and wounding two
American soldiers, said Javed Faisal, a spokesman for the Kandahar governor, who
said no condolences had yet been received from Kabul.

The disparity in the Afghan president's reaction has been rued by American
officials here, but little commented upon, to avoid a messy diplomatic squabble
in an already troubled alliance. Now it has started to draw criticism among many
Afghans, who complain that their president has been looking for excuses to
besmirch the Americans and delay signing a vitally important security deal with
them, while overlooking equally serious or even worse abuses attributed to the
Taliban.

In short, many Afghans have begun asking, Who exactly are our enemies here? The
Americans, who underwrite our government and military but now say they will be
forced to withdraw in 2015 without a security deal? Or the Taliban, who have a
history of killing officials even remotely connected with the government -- a
policy that has apparently begun to claim the lives even of some independent
relief workers?

That unease has spread throughout governing circles, and several prominent
officials have said that a meeting of the president's cabinet last Monday was
dominated by ministers who tried to persuade Mr. Karzai to sign the bilateral
security agreement promptly, as his own handpicked loya jirga, or grand council,
also urged him to do on Nov. 24.

''We were so shocked by the president's decision on postponing the signing of
the B.S.A.,'' one high-ranking official said, on the condition of anonymity to
preserve his job. ''I think most of his advisers and members of his cabinet
disagree with the president on the B.S.A. issue. They all want it to be
signed.''

Atiqullah Baryalai, a former deputy defense minister in the Karzai government,
said, ''His entire cabinet is against him on this.''

''The only ones with him are his spokesman and a few in his inner circle like
Khurram,'' he added, referring to Mr. Karzai's chief of staff, Abdul Karim
Khurram. A member of the hard-line and conservative Hizb-i-Islami political
party, Mr. Khurram since 2012 has been in control of the president's news media
message, persuading Mr. Karzai to appoint a Khurram ally, Aimal Faizi, as
spokesman and wresting control of the Government Media and Information Center
from its American-mentored staff.

At the president's cabinet meeting last Monday, Finance Minister Omar Zakhilwal
went through a detailed analysis of what Afghanistan had to lose financially.

''We need international support,'' Mr. Zakhilwal said he reminded the cabinet.
''Without that, we would not have been here. Our security, every element of
government development, depends on it.''

Mr. Zakhilwal has a close relationship with Mr. Karzai and is also well regarded
by the Americans.

After the cabinet session, Mr. Zakhilwal gave a series of interviews suggesting
that Mr. Karzai was moderating the demands he had made before he would agree to
sign the deal, dropping his insistence on a politically difficult release of
Afghan prisoners from the American base at Guant√°namo Bay, Cuba, and accepting
United States assurances that it would not interfere in next year's Afghan
presidential elections.

That left only the president's insistence that raids on Afghan homes had to stop
immediately (instead of in 2015, as provided in the security agreement) and that
the Americans should make some initial steps to try to restart peace talks with
the Taliban.

''These are conditions that are doable,'' Mr. Zakhilwal said in an interview.
''These things could be done very quickly.''

He predicted that the security agreement could be signed within two or three
weeks, if there was proof that home raids had really stopped and some concrete
overtures toward peace talks were made. ''The president absolutely has no
intention of delaying this thing,'' Mr. Zakhilwal said.

Mr. Faizi, the spokesman, said he had made similar assurances in an interview
with 1TV, an Afghan station.

Then the drone attack in Helmand took place on Thursday.

Asked on Friday about Mr. Zakhilwal's assurances, Mr. Faizi was dismissive. In
an email response to questions, he said of Mr. Zakhilwal: ''His opinion is based
on what I said two days ago to 1TV in an interview, which was the case. But
yesterday's incident in Helmand has damaged the whole atmosphere.''

''President Obama assured President Karzai that the U.S. will 'make every effort
to respect the sanctity and dignity of Afghans in their homes and in their daily
lives, JUST AS WE DO FOR OUR OWN CITIZENS,' '' he said, quoting from a letter
that Mr. Obama sent Mr. Karzai, to which Mr. Faizi added his own emphasis.
''That is how the U.S. respects the sanctity and dignity of homes in the U.S.,
bombing a residence for an individual?''

The Taliban for years have been killing far more civilians than the coalition
has; the latest United Nations report on the subject says three-fourths of the
1,038 civilian fatalities between January and July this year were by the
Taliban, and less than one-tenth of them by the Americans and their coalition
partners.

''What does this mean, when every time he says nothing about the Taliban but
always is raising questions about the Americans?'' Mr. Baryalai asked. ''I think
Karzai is sending a message to the Taliban, that he really doesn't want a
security agreement with the Americans.''

Most of Mr. Karzai's American allies, for all the bruising they have taken from
him in public lately, would probably not go that far. But, as one Western
diplomat warned, noting how weak public support was in the United States for a
continued mission in Afghanistan: ''Mr. Karzai should be careful what he wishes
for.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/01/world/asia/another-afghan-child-dead-a-differe
nt-response.html

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The body of a would-be suicide bomber who never reached his
target in Kandahar, Afghanistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAVED TANVEER/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


