                             673 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 10, 2013 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

An Evolutionary Twist and a New Role for Drones

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS QUENQUA

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; THE WEEK; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 625 words


Congratulations to ''science,'' named by Merriam-Webster as its 2013 Word of the
Year after searches for the term on its website jumped 176 percent. The word
''does lurk behind a lot of big stories that we as a society are grappling
with,'' John Morse, president of Merriam-Webster, told The Christian Science
Monitor.

This is not the last word on the Word of the Year; several other linguistic
groups make their own selections. Honors typically go to a trendy new term
(''hashtag'' in 2012, ''unfriend'' in 2009), or a familiar word given new
relevance (''occupy'' in 2011). Last month, Oxford University Press offered
''selfie.'' The American Dialect Society will make its selection in January.

Developments

Evolution: Early Human Mystery

A 400,000-year-old femur recovered from a cave in Spain shows that human
evolution was far more complex than previously thought. By applying new DNA
extraction techniques to the fossil, thought to belong to an ancestor of the
Neanderthals, researchers recovered the oldest human genetic material ever
found. But the closest DNA match they discovered came from a lineage of humans
thought to have lived just 80,000 years ago in Siberia, 4,000 miles east of
where the new femur was discovered. The apparent mismatch has geneticists
rethinking the past few hundred thousand years of human evolution. ''We've
basically generated a big question mark,'' said an author of the study,
published in the journal Nature.

Robotics: A Race to Automate

Factories, distribution centers and grocery stores are still largely staffed by
humans, but that could change if Google and Amazon have their way.

On ''60 Minutes,'' Jeff Bezos, the chief executive of Amazon, unveiled his
company's plan to offer 30-minute delivery using an army of GPS-guided drones.
With characteristic optimism, he said he expected to secure government approval
within five years.

At the same time, Google is putting its resources behind the development of a
new generation of robots. It has acquired seven technology companies in the past
six months and put Andy Rubin, who built Google's Android software into a
dominant force in smartphones, in charge of the effort.

Environment: Big Changes Ahead

Not all of the changes caused by global warming may be of the gradual, ''we can
adjust over decades'' variety, a scientific panel warned. Several human and
natural systems could be in danger of rapid and catastrophic collapse, said the
panel's report, which called for an early warning system to alert society to any
such changes.

The panel, appointed by the National Research Council, warned of a mass
extinction of plants and animals and said rising heat in the upper ocean could
deprive the deep ocean of oxygen, creating ''dead zones'' where animals could
not survive.

Linguistics: It's, Like, Not Just for Girls?

The dialect known as uptalk -- speaking like this? Like everything is a
question? -- has spread to young men in Southern California, according to a new
study. Researchers recorded about two dozen native Californians giving
directions or discussing a sitcom, and found that the tendency to end statements
in a higher pitch transcends gender boundaries.

All participants were 18 to 22 years old, ''so we cannot say anything definitive
about older Southern Californians,'' a researcher said.

Coming Up

Space: A Private Guest

The International Space Station is to receive its next visit from a private
commercial spacecraft next week. The Cygnus resupply craft, built by Orbital
Sciences, is set to be launched Dec. 17 from the Wallops Flight Facility in
Virginia and to arrive at the space station on Dec. 20. This will be the
company's first official mission for NASA's commercial resupply program, though
it completed a demonstration mission in September.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/10/science/an-evolutionary-twist-and-a-new-role-f
or-drones.html

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 11, 2013; December 12, 2013



CORRECTION:Â A report in the Week column Tuesday about the planned launch of the
Cygnus resupply craft on its trip to the International Space Station misstated
the launch date and the arrival date. It is to be launched on Tuesday, Dec. 17;
it did not leave on Tuesday. And it will arrive on Friday, Dec. 20 -- not this
Friday.

Because of an editing error, a report in the Week column on Tuesday about a Word
of the Year for 2013 attributed some previous years' words to the wrong
institution. ''Hashtag'' was selected by the American Dialect Society as its
word of 2012 and the Oxford Dictionary's word of 2009 was ''unfriend.''
Merriam-Webster did not select those words. (Its selection this year, based on
searches on its website, was ''science.'')

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY KENNIS & KENNIS/MADRID SCIENTIFIC FILMS)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


