                             689 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hard Talk Aside, Little Desire by the West to Leave Afghanistan

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER; Rod Nordland contributed reporting from Kabul,
Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; MILITARY ANALYSIS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1020 words


BRUSSELS -- Listening to the Western defense officials gathered at a NATO
meeting here on Wednesday, it would be easy to think that the United States and
the rest of the international military coalition in Afghanistan have shifted
into a full-speed withdrawal from the country by year's end.

After all, the statements from NATO officials all picked up where President
Obama left off on Tuesday. He abruptly announced that he had instructed the
Pentagon to begin planning for a complete withdrawal because President Hamid
Karzai of Afghanistan was continuing his refusal to sign a bilateral security
agreement that would allow Western troops to remain past 2014.

''We all know the facts,'' the NATO secretary general, Anders Fogh Rasmussen,
said. ''If the bilateral security agreement between the United States and
Afghanistan is not signed, there will be no NATO status of forces agreement with
Afghanistan. And if there is no agreement, there will be no NATO troops in
Afghanistan after 2014.''

But as all the withdrawal talk has hardened, another message can be read that
may be a truer gauge of what Western officials really want to happen in
Afghanistan.

Mr. Rasmussen sent that other message too, when, after warning about a full
withdrawal, he quickly qualified it: ''Let me stress, this is not our preferred
option.''

And there, defense analysts say, lies the truth that makes the Western ultimatum
to Mr. Karzai look more like posturing than policy.

Few of the interested parties -- and especially not the Pentagon -- really want
to cut and run out of Afghanistan after 13 years of war in which almost 3,500
coalition troops, mostly American, have been killed; an untold but exponentially
higher number of Afghan civilians have died or been wounded; and $700 billion
has been spent.

The reason is simple: Military commanders and policy experts say that without a
remaining core of Western troops to support the Afghan government and continue
training the security forces, the chances are high that significant swaths of
the country will fall back under Taliban control, just as they were before the
Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

After the blood and sweat of the past 13 years of war, that potential return to
old realities is seen as a particularly bitter pill.

''If we withdraw, and the international community withdraws its aid, you will
see the potential for the Afghan government to collapse, the insurgency to gain
momentum and territory, take over eastern Afghanistan, recreating a safe haven
for terrorist elements that still harbor an anti-U.S. agenda,'' said Mich√®le
Flournoy, a former top Pentagon official in the Obama administration. ''After
all of this effort and all of this sacrifice and all of this progress, you're
back to a new safe haven for terrorists? It's like, it just makes no sense.''

American intelligence officials have warned in classified assessments that
insurgents could retake key areas of Afghanistan in the south and the east in as
little as a year after American troops are fully withdrawn. The assessments also
warn that Kabul, the capital, could quickly come under more serious attack than
it has in recent years.

Such a turn could also lead to insecurity for India and Pakistan, foreign policy
experts say, with each of the nuclear-armed South Asian nations entering a more
aggressive proxy war in Afghanistan in a bid for regional influence and a trump
card to play against the other.

''The neighboring countries, they all want us to stay,'' said David Sedney,
former deputy assistant secretary of defense for Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Central Asia. ''If we were to leave, the consequences for Pakistan, for the
Indians -- these countries want a stable Afghanistan.''

American planners are thinking about what would happen if the United States is
forced into a full and final troop withdrawal. Part of that contingency
planning, officials say, will include looking to other countries -- perhaps in
Central Asia -- for air bases that would allow continued drone operations in the
region.

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel alluded to that this month when he said at a news
conference that the military was ''constantly updating'' where to put drone
bases, ''where the threats are most significant, where do you have allies that
are willing to work with you.''

But military officials say that a complete pullout from Afghanistan, where the
United States now has the luxury of the base at Bagram from which to provide
support, would hurt the American counterterrorism effort.

Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said as much
during a meeting with commanders in Afghanistan on Tuesday, urging them to keep
pushing. ''It is not an indication that we're not committed to a mission beyond
the end of 2014,'' he said, ''because we very much believe the Afghan security
forces could use our help.''

General Dempsey said that Western threats to fully withdraw were weakening the
Afghan forces' resolve, and that the impasse over the security agreement was
encouraging the Taliban to be more aggressive. ''It is having an effect on the
enemy, and in some ways I think encourages them, and intelligence supports
that,'' he said in an interview with The Associated Press.

Many Afghan officials -- including all 11 of the presidential candidates vying
to succeed Mr. Karzai this spring -- have said they want some American troops to
stay. And on Wednesday, Mr. Karzai's spokesman, Aimal Faizi, insisted that a
security deal could eventually be reached.

''I would like to restate our position on this: There is no zero option,'' he
said, referring to the possibility of leaving no American troops in Afghanistan.

Other officials emphasized how critical international aid was to keeping any
sort of stability in Afghanistan after 2014.

''I personally believe that Obama will not go with the zero option,'' said Aryan
Yoon, the head of the international relations committee in the Afghan
Parliament. He added, ''The Americans should know that the minute they pull out
from Afghanistan without leaving a residual force, the country will plunge into
a civil war and will go back to the '90s.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/27/world/asia/hard-talk-aside-little-desire-by-we
st-to-leave-afghanistan.html

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Military Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


