                             698 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2014 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Obama Dedicates 9/11 Memorial Museum

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER and STEPHEN FARRELL

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1085 words


President Obama on Thursday dedicated the long-awaited museum commemorating the
attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, with a mournful elegy to the victims, a stirring
tribute to the heroes and a firm resolve to never let terrorists shatter the
spirit of America.

''No act of terror can match the strength or the character of our country,'' Mr.
Obama told a crowd that included family members of those slain and other invited
guests in the cavernous underground hall of the National September 11 Memorial
Museum. ''Like the great wall and bedrock that embrace us today,'' he added,
''nothing can ever break us. Nothing can change who we are as Americans.''

The president's remarks highlighted a somber ceremony at the new institution
marking the worst foreign attack on American soil, one that shocked the world
and ushered in a new era of fear, war, determination and clashes of values while
redefining America's place in the world. Surrounded by the twisted and
graffiti-inscribed steel remnants of New York's twin towers, the president and
the other guests vowed never to forget.

Former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg played host for the event, joined by a
plethora of other major figures from the region, including Govs. Chris Christie
of New Jersey and Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York,
former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and former Gov. George E. Pataki.

Outside, flags were at half-staff on the memorial plaza, where bronze panels
bear the names of the nearly 3,000 people who perished in New York, Northern
Virginia and Pennsylvania on Sept. 11, and in the bombing of the World Trade
Center in 1993.

Inside, the event was held in the museum's Foundation Hall, 70 feet beneath
ground level, at bedrock, with around 700 invited guests attending.

Mr. Obama, solemn and quiet, used his remarks not to talk about the events that
followed that day, the wars he has tried to end and the policies he has reshaped
but continued. Instead, he focused on the victims who perished in flames and
smoke and those who tried to save them.

''Here we tell their story, so that generations yet unborn will never forget, of
co-workers who led others to safety,'' he said.

He singled out the heroism of a young man with a red bandanna who helped save
people in the south tower before it collapsed. His identity was long unknown
until months later when his mother read an article about the mysterious savior
with the red bandanna and recognized him. He was Welles Crowther, 24.

''He had a big laugh and a joy of life and dreams of seeing the world,'' Mr.
Obama said. ''He worked in finance, but he had also been a volunteer
firefighter. And after the planes hit, he put on that bandanna and spent his
final moments saving others.''

Joining Mr. Obama for a tour of the museum before the ceremony were former
President Bill Clinton and former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton. A
spokesman for former President George W. Bush, who was in office on the day of
the attacks, said he was invited but could not make it because of a scheduling
conflict.

Mr. Obama's remarks were crisp and short. He was given just three minutes on the
program, although he took nine, an unusually short speech for a president at
such a high-profile event. But he was not the main focus of the day. In addition
to the political figures, survivors and relatives of victims told their stories
in videos projected on the wall or from the podium -- including Alison Crowther,
who was Mr. Crowther's mother, and Ling Young, who was among those he saved that
day.

Eileen Fagan, whose sister Patricia died on the 98th floor of the south tower,
also attended the ceremony. Some of her sister's remains have been identified,
and she chose to leave part of them in a specially built medical examiner's
repository at the site, which is separated from the museum by a wall.

''Everyone here can feel the presence of their loved one, in a very real way,''
she said. ''I walked with Pat through the World Trade Center so many times and I
feel like I am walking with Pat again. It's a good feeling, a little bit sad,
but a good feeling.''

As for Mr. Obama, he was a state senator in Illinois on the day of the attacks.
In his book ''The Audacity of Hope,'' he recalled hearing about the first plane
hitting the tower while listening to the radio in a car on the way to a
legislative hearing in Chicago. By the time he arrived, the second tower had
been hit and the government office in Chicago was evacuated.

''Up and down the streets, people gathered, staring at the sky and at the Sears
Tower,'' he wrote. ''Later, in my law office, a group of us sat motionless as
the nightmare images unfolded across the TV screen.''

While he was not seared by the experience in the same way as Mr. Bush, who took
from it a mission to tackle terrorism around the world and protect America from
any further attack, it fell to Mr. Obama to inherit the wars that followed when
he took over the Oval Office in 2009.

He has spent the last five years trying to find what he considers the right
balance in the nation's struggle with terrorism. He continued many of Mr. Bush's
counterterrorism policies, including drone strikes in the tribal regions of
Pakistan and surveillance programs that have stirred international controversy,
and brought to a dramatic finish the global manhunt for Osama bin Laden with a
bold special forces raid that ended in the death of bin Laden.

But Mr. Obama has sought to move away from what he sees as a permanent,
all-consuming war on terror. He pulled all American troops from Iraq and plans
to pull nearly all from Afghanistan by the end of the year. And yet many of his
ideas for reshaping American national security have not been brought to
fruition, whether it be restricting the C.I.A. involvement in drones or closing
the prison at Guant√°namo Bay, Cuba.

Mr. Obama talked about none of that on Thursday. With Michelle Obama, Mr.
Bloomberg and the Clintons, he toured the exhibits beforehand, stopping to stare
at photographs of victims mounted on a wall, examining a battered New York Fire
Department ladder truck and passing a wall engraved by a Virgil quote: ''No Day
Shall Erase You From the Memory of Time.''

He called it ''a profound and moving experience,'' and he noted that one of the
items on display was a red bandanna that once belonged to Welles Crowther.

''And from this day forward,'' Mr. Obama said, ''all those who come here will
have a chance to know the sacrifice of a young man who, like so many, gave his
life so others might live.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/16/nyregion/obama-dedicates-9-11-memorial-museum.
html

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


