                             703 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

President Obama Misses a Chance on Foreign Affairs

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 527 words


President Obama and his aides heralded his commencement speech at the United
States Military Academy at West Point on Wednesday as a big moment, when he
would lay out his foreign policy vision for the remainder of his term and refute
his critics. The address did not match the hype, was largely uninspiring, lacked
strategic sweep and is unlikely to quiet his detractors, on the right or the
left.

Mr. Obama did make a strong case on the use of force. Understandably frustrated
by critics who ''think military intervention is the only way for America to
avoid looking weak,'' Mr. Obama was steady and sensible on this vital issue. He
endorsed military action, even unilaterally, when the country is threatened or
when the security of its allies is in danger. But he stressed, correctly, that
not every problem has a military solution and warned that ''some of our most
costly mistakes came not from our restraint but from our willingness to rush
into military adventures.'' (He was right, for instance to call off the threat
of action after President Bashar al-Assad of Syria agreed to surrender his
chemical weapons.)

In his speech, Mr. Obama tried to push back against critics who say he has ceded
America's post-World War II dominance. The question, as he correctly put it, is
''not whether America will lead but how we will lead'' and he reasserted that
''isolationism is not an option.'' Mr. Obama was right when he suggested there
would be no serious negotiations over Iran's nuclear program without his
approach to American leadership.

But he provided little new insight into how he plans to lead in the next two
years, and many still doubt that he fully appreciates the leverage the United
States has even in a changing world. Falling back on hackneyed phrases like
America is the ''indispensable nation'' told us little.

The president said he wanted to spend $5 billion to train and support armies in
places like Libya, Mali, Yemen and Somalia to combat terrorists. The aim is to
avoid having to use American troops, and, in theory, it makes sense. But the
United States has a checkered history in such endeavors, and Mr. Obama made only
a cursory mention of other factors crucial to success, including responsible
governance and education for all. It was disturbing to hear him gloss over the
return of military rule in Egypt.

Mr. Obama's talk of the need for more transparency about drone strikes and
intelligence gathering, including abusive surveillance practices, was ludicrous.
His administration had to be dragged into even minimal disclosures on both
topics. Just Tuesday, the administration said it wanted to make further
deletions from a legal memo on drone strikes that a court ordered it to make
public.

Mr. Obama's comments on China and Russia barely touched on how he plans to
manage two major countries that have turned increasingly aggressive. Pledging
anew to close the jail at Guant√°namo Bay, Cuba, which Congress has blocked, was,
at this point, little more than a reassuring gesture.

This was far from Mr. Obama's big moment. But since he has no office left to run
for, what matters ultimately is his record in the next two and a half years.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/29/opinion/president-obama-misses-a-chance-on-for
eign-affairs.html

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


