                             707 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Don't Fight in Iraq and Ignore Syria

BYLINE: By ANNE-MARIE SLAUGHTER.

Anne-Marie Slaughter, the president and chief executive of the New America
Foundation, was director of policy planning at the State Department from 2009 to
2011.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 918 words


WASHINGTON -- FOR the last two years, many people in the foreign policy
community, myself included, have argued repeatedly for the use of force in Syria
-- to no avail. We have been pilloried as warmongers and targeted, by none other
than President Obama, as people who do not understand that force is not the
solution to every question. A wiser course, he argued at West Point, is to use
force only in defense of America's vital interests.

Suddenly, however, in the space of a week, the administration has begun
considering the use of force in Iraq, including drones, against the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, which has been occupying city after city and
moving ever closer to Baghdad.

The sudden turn of events leaves people like me scratching our heads. Why is the
threat of ISIS in Iraq a sufficiently vital interest, but not the rise of ISIS
in Syria -- and a hideous civil war that has dismembered Syria itself and
destabilized Lebanon, Jordan and now Iraq?

I suspect White House officials would advance three reasons.

First, they would say, the fighters in Iraq include members of Al Qaeda. But
that ignores recent history. Experts have predicted for over a year that unless
we acted in Syria, ISIS would establish an Islamic state in eastern Syria and
western Iraq, exactly what we are watching. So why not take them on directly in
Syria, where their demise would strengthen the moderate opposition?

Because, the White House might say, of the second reason, the Iraqi government
is asking for help. That makes the use of force legitimate under international
law, whereas in Syria the same government that started the killing, deliberately
fanned the flames of civil war, and will not allow humanitarian aid to starving
and mortally ill civilians, objects to the use of force against it.

But here the law sets the interests of the Iraqi government against those of its
people. It allows us to help a government that has repeatedly violated
power-sharing agreements in ways that have driven Sunni support for ISIS. And
from a strategic point of view, it is a government that is deeply in Iran's
pocket -- to the extent, as Fareed Zakaria reported in his Washington Post
column last week, that Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki would not agree to a
residual American force because the Iranians forbade it.

The third reason the White House would give is that America fought a decade-long
war in Iraq, at a terrible cost. We overturned a stable, strong but brutal
government, although far less brutal than President Bashar al-Assad's has proved
to be, and left a weak and unstable government. We cannot allow our soldiers to
have fought in vain, the argument goes, so we should now prop up the government
we left in place.

This is where the White House is most blind. It sees the world on two planes:
the humanitarian world of individual suffering, where no matter how
heart-rending the pictures and how horrific the crimes, American vital interests
are not engaged because it is just people; and the strategic world of government
interests, where what matters is the chess game of one leader against another,
and stopping both state and nonstate actors who are able to harm the United
States.

In fact, the two planes are inextricably linked. When a government begins to
massacre its own citizens, with chemical weapons, barrel bombs and starvation,
as Syria's continues to do, it must be stopped. If it is not stopped, violence,
displacement and fanaticism will flourish.

Deciding that the Syrian government, as bad as it is, was still better than the
alternative of ISIS profoundly missed the point. As long as we allow the Syrian
government to continue perpetrating the worst campaign of crimes against
humanity since Rwanda, support for ISIS will continue. As long as we choose
Prime Minister Maliki over the interests of his citizens, all his citizens, his
government can never be safe.

President Obama should be asking the same question in Iraq and Syria. What
course of action will be best, in the short and the long term, for the Iraqi and
Syrian people? What course of action will be most likely to stop the violence
and misery they experience on a daily basis? What course of action will give
them the best chance of peace, prosperity and a decent government?

The answer to those questions may well involve the use of force on a limited but
immediate basis, in both countries. Enough force to remind all parties that we
can, from the air, see and retaliate against not only Al Qaeda members, whom our
drones track for months, but also any individuals guilty of mass atrocities and
crimes against humanity. Enough force to compel governments and rebels alike to
the negotiating table. And enough force to create a breathing space in which
decent leaders can begin to consolidate power.

On the legal side, we should act in both countries because we face a threat to
global peace and security, precisely the situation the United Nations Security
Council was established to address. If nations like Russia and China block
action for their own narrow interests, we should act multilaterally, as we did
in Kosovo, and then seek the Council's approval after the fact. The United
Nations Charter was created for peace among the people of the world, not as an
instrument of state power.

This is not merely a humanitarian calculation. It is a strategic calculation.
One that, if the president had been prepared to make it two years ago, could
have stopped the carnage spreading today in Syria and in Iraq.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/18/opinion/dont-fight-in-iraq-and-ignore-syria.ht
ml

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY PABLO DELC√ÅN)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


