                             715 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 31, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dust to Dust on the ground in Israel and Gaza.

BYLINE: By JODI RUDOREN.

Jodi Rudoren is the Jerusalem bureau chief for The Times.

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 685 words


In mid-August, I read a column in an Israeli newspaper by a mother who described
putting her children to bed in their home near Gaza, where fighting between the
Israeli military and Hamas had been raging since July 8. She explained how she
made sure the path to the safe room was clear of toys so that they would be able
to get there in the allotted 15 seconds if a siren sounded. I thought of her
kids, lying in bed and trying to go to sleep. I had also just gotten back from
Gaza, where there are neither sirens nor safe rooms, so I could hardly help
thinking about all the toys buried under the rubble. On both sides, another
generation is growing up amid violence and fear.

For many around the world, the most recent outbreak of war in Israel and Gaza
has seemed like a rerun of a familiar film. The last dismal showing ended 20
months earlier, the one before that in 2009. For those closest to the fighting,
it has been an inescapable fact of life for decades; Israel's history is one of
intermittent war with its Arab neighbors from the country's founding 66 years
ago. This summer's conflict followed a breakdown in American-brokered peace
talks that few ever believed would bear fruit. Israelis contend that what
started it was the June kidnapping and Â­murder of three teenagers hitchhiking
home from their yeshivas in the occupied West Bank. Palestinians point to
Israel's earlier rejection of a reconciliation government that included
Hamas,the Islamist movement that dominates Gaza.

The situation escalated in July, and despite several cease-fires, the fighting
shows little sign of reaching an end. Many educated, secular Palestinians who
usually renounce violence supported Hamas as it launched more than 3,500 rockets
into Israel, repeatedly entered Israeli territory through tunnels and killed 64
soldiers. On the other side, many Israeli Jews cheered from a hill in the border
town of Sderot as the Iron Dome defense system shot down incoming rockets and as
Israeli airstrikes hit Gaza. Though the high number of civilians among the
2,000-plus Palestinians killed stoked outrage internationally, some European
protests tinged by anti-Semitism hardened a sense among Israeli Jews that they
are misunderstood, their very existence threatened on all sides. Even the
Zionist left all but disappeared into unity behind what Israelis regard as an
Ein Breira War -- a war of no choice.

In the first half of August, the magazine sent Paolo Pellegrin and Peter van
Agtmael to capture life on the ground in Gaza and Israel. The goal was to show,
through the distinct styles of two photographers, a glimpse of what things look
like in these inextricably linked, and yet utterly separated, places. That was a
period of off-and-on cease-fires, when the conflict's asymmetry nevertheless
remained on display. Pellegrin's black-and-white pictures document the
devastation in neighborhoods where an estimated 100,000 Gazans have lost their
homes. In van Agtmael's subdued color photographs of Israel, there is far less
destruction, but there is no lack of tension, sorrow and, at moments, great
alarm.

As the magazine went to press, cease-fire talks had collapsed and violence had
resumed. Hamas saw little leverage beyond firing off more rockets: more than 300
in two days. Israel insisted that it would not negotiate while under attack and
that it had no choice but to respond. Ein Breira. It is hard to find a clear
path forward.

The gulf is not just between Israeli and Palestinian leaders, but also between
average people in both places, whose perceptions of who started the war and who
is winning it are diametrically opposed. The situation may be best described by
a comment I heard from Bashar Masri, a West Bank businessman and one of the
dwindling number of Palestinians and Israelis who have real relationships across
the concrete barrier that divides the holy land. This summer, he avoided leaving
his home in Ramallah to take meetings among the skyscrapers and seaside cafes of
Tel Aviv. The two cities were no longer just different worlds, he told me at a
recent dinner; they had become different planets.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/31/magazine/photo-essay-on-the-ground-in-israel-a
nd-gaza.html

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Gaza City, Aug. 13.: The damage in the heavily bombed Shejaiya
neighborhood. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAOLO PELLEGRIN AND PETER VAN AGTMAEL) (MM26-MM37)
Jerusalem, Aug. 5.: The funeral of Avraham Walz, 29, who was killed in an attack
earlier in the day by a Palestinian driving a stolen construction vehicle. Six
other Israelis were injured. Deadly violence in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
has increased during the fighting in Gaza. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER VAN
AGTMAEL/MAGNUM, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM28-MM29)
Top: Nuseirat refugee camp, Gaza Strip, Aug. 9. Rescuers looking for survivors
and bodies at the Qassam Mosque. The bodies of four men were extracted from the
site after hours of searching. Bottom: Khan Younis, Gaza Strip, Aug. 11.: The
funeral of Hassan Kaware'e, a 24-year-old barber. He was killed in a drone
attack that left another man dead and several other people injured. (MM30)
Top: Deir al-Balah, Gaza Strip, Aug. 10.: The funeral of Ahmed al-Masri, 14, who
was on his way to a health clinic when he was killed in a drone strike. Four
others were injured in the attack. Bottom: Sheikh Ejleen, Gaza Strip, Aug. 9.
One of more than 60 mosques that have been destroyed. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PAOLO
PELLEGRIN/MAGNUM, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM31)
Top: Netivot, Israel, Aug. 4.: A communal bomb shelter, where parents sometimes
leave their children while they're at work. Houses built since 1991 have been
required to have their own safe rooms, but shelters like this one are still used
in older neighborhoods. Bottom: Netivot, Israel, Aug. 4.: Shimon Ohana, 50,
whose property was damaged by a rocket fired from Gaza. (MM32)
Top: Kerem Shalom, Israel, Aug. 7. Humanitarian aid at a border crossing between
Israel and the Gaza Strip. Unicef, U.S.A.I.D. and the World Health Organization
are some of the groups that have sent aid to Gaza through this crossing. Bottom:
Jerusalem, Aug. 7.: Khaled Mraheel, a 6-year-old Palestinian, and his family at
Al-Makassed Islamic Charitable Society Hospital. Khaled was injured in a bombing
in Gaza. His family was granted a permit to travel to East Jerusalem for medical
treatment, a process that requires coordination between the Israeli military and
the Palestinian Authority. (MM33)
Netivot, Israel, Aug. 4.: Israeli soldiers taking cover in a bunker during a
rocket attack. Israeli missiles intercepted the rocket. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PETER
VAN AGTMAEL/MAGNUM, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM34-MM35)
  Gaza City, Aug. 8.: The funeral of Ibrahim Dawawsa, 10, who was killed in a
drone attack in the Sheikh Radwan neighborhood. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAOLO
PELLEGRIN/MAGNUM, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM36-MM37)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


