                             710 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 26, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russia Steps Up Help for Rebels in Ukraine War

BYLINE: By DAVID M. HERSZENHORN and PETER BAKER; David M. Herszenhorn reported
from Kiev, and Peter Baker from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Michael
R. Gordon from Cairo, James Kanter from Brussels, and Oksana Lyachynska from
Kiev.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1213 words


KIEV, Ukraine -- Rather than backing down after last week's downing of a
civilian passenger jet, Russia appears to be intervening more aggressively in
the war in eastern Ukraine in what American and Ukrainian officials call a
dangerous escalation that will almost certainly force more robust retaliation
from the United States and Europe.

Russia has increased its direct involvement in fighting between the Ukrainian
military and separatist insurgents, moving more of its own troops to the border
and preparing to arm the rebels with ever more potent weapons, including
high-powered Tornado rocket launchers, American and Ukrainian officials said on
Friday.

The officials, citing satellite images and other military intelligence, said
that Russia had positioned heavy weapons, including tanks and other combat
vehicles, at several points along the border where there has been intense
fighting. On Thursday, Russia unleashed artillery attacks on eastern Ukraine
from Russian territory, officials in Washington and Kiev said. While Russia
flatly denied accelerating its intervention on Friday, American and Ukrainian
officials said Moscow appeared anxious to stem gains by government forces that
have succeeded in retaking some rebel-held territory.

The reported Russian moves raised the prospect of a new and more perilous
chapter opening in a conflict that has already inflamed the region and, with the
destruction of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 with 298 aboard, stunned the world.
American officials blamed a Russian-provided surface-to-air missile for the
explosion and hoped the shock of the episode would prompt the Kremlin to rethink
its approach, but they are increasingly convinced it has not.

Obama administration officials said Russia's rising involvement had stiffened
the resolve of European leaders who have been reluctant to confront Moscow for
fear of damaging their own economies. But there was no appetite for a direct
military response, and it remained unclear whether the West could or would take
action that may change the calculus of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia as
Moscow seems to devote more firepower to the fight.

American and Ukrainian officials said Russia has moved beyond simply helping
separatists and is now engaging directly in the war. Multiple Ukrainian military
planes have been brought down in recent days by missiles fired from Russian
territory, and now artillery batteries are firing from across the border into
Ukraine, the officials said.

''We have detected that firing and that does represent an escalation in this
conflict,'' said Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary. ''It only
underscores the concerns that the United States and the international community
has about Russian behavior and the need for the Putin regime to change their
strategy.''

American officials said Russia has moved 15,000 troops near the border. Col.
Steve Warren, a Pentagon spokesman, told reporters that Russia had made
''imminent'' plans to deliver heavier rockets to the separatists. Instead of Mr.
Putin de-escalating the conflict after the Malaysia Airlines tragedy, ''he's
actually taken a decision to escalate,'' Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, told a security forum in Aspen, Colo.

Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. called President Petro O. Poroshenko of
Ukraine to express solidarity and pledge to coordinate with allies ''about
imposing further costs on Russia for its deeply destabilizing and irresponsible
actions in Ukraine,'' the White House said in a statement.

While the United States has been hesitant to make its intelligence public,
Ukrainian officials have provided a daily, running list of Russian incursions,
including flights into Ukrainian air space by fighter jets and unmanned
surveillance drones, as well as mortar and rocket attacks.

''We have facts of shelling of Ukrainian positions from the territory of Russian
Federation,'' Andriy Lysenko, a spokesman for Ukraine's National Security and
Defense Council, said at a briefing in Kiev on Friday. ''We have facts on the
violation of air border between Ukraine and Russia.''

Mr. Lysenko said there were active-duty Russian soldiers who had surrendered, as
well as volunteer Russian fighters who had been captured. ''We have information
about weapons and mercenaries who have respective skills for warfare, who have
been passing over from the territory of the Russian Federation,'' Mr. Lysenko
said.

Russia pointedly denied the American allegations on Friday. In a statement, the
Russian Foreign Ministry accused the United States of engaging in a ''smear
campaign.''

''All of this is accompanied by references to some 'evidence' allegedly
available to the United States,'' the ministry said. ''Not one of these
'evidences,' however, has been shown, which is not surprising. Facts and
specifics to support false allegations simply do not exist.''

On Friday, the European Union took another step toward imposing additional
economic penalties focused on the financial, energy and military sectors of the
Russian economy, but a letter to European leaders from Herman Van Rompuy, the
president of the European Council, made clear that officials were still
struggling to find a balance.

Mr. Lysenko, the military spokesman, said that Ukrainian troops were coming
under increased fire from the Russian side of the border, and that the Ukrainian
military had recently shot down three Russian surveillance drones. One was used
to target a Ukrainian base near the town of Amvrosiivka, which then quickly came
under heavy rocket attack, he said.

Ukrainian officials say their forces have recaptured at least 10 towns,
shrinking the amount of territory under rebel control in the embattled regions
of Luhansk and Donetsk and gaining substantial advantage, including over some of
the main highways in the region.

The recent gains by Ukrainian forces included the recapture of the city of
Lysychansk after days of fighting. The city of more than 100,000 had been a
rebel stronghold, and it posed a strategic obstacle to government troops
pressing through the Luhansk region from the north and west. Ukrainian ground
troops needed air support to expel the rebels, but were able to push them south
and out of the city.

Officials have said they believed that they could defeat the rebels within three
weeks if there were no further intervention by Russia.

By placing forces close to the border, the Russians can provide fire support to
the separatists, prevent Ukrainian troops from establishing control over the
border and facilitate the delivery of Russian arms to the separatists. The
Ukrainian military has expressed frustration that at least two sections of the
border remain porous. One goal of the Russian attacks on targets, an American
official said, is to keep Ukrainian forces away from the border, making it
easier for Russia to transport weapons and cooperate with the insurgents.

''The quantity and sophistication of weaponry being sent by Russia across the
border is increasing,'' one Western official said on Friday, adding that Russian
artillery units have been firing into Ukraine from Russian territory ''in direct
support of separatists.'' Like other officials with access to classified
intelligence assessments, he spoke on the condition of anonymity.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/26/world/europe/russian-artillery-fires-into-ukra
ine-kiev-says.html

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ukrainian troops in Semenovka, a village in the Donetsk region,
on Friday. The United States said Russia had deployed high-powered Tornado
rocket launchers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GENYA SAVILOV/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY
IMAGES): Ukraine troops have reduced territory held by insurgents. Above right,
waiting at a bus stop destroyed in a battle near Donetsk. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IGOR
KOVALENKO/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (A12) MAPS (A12)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


