                             723 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 15, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Drone Pulling Albanian Banner Sets Off Skirmishes

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Sports Desk; ROUNDUP; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 433 words


A 2016 European Championship qualifier between Serbia and Albania in Belgrade,
Serbia, was abandoned Tuesday after skirmishes broke out involving players and
fans over an Albanian flag that was flown above the field by a drone.

The referee, Martin Atkinson, interrupted the match in the 41st minute when one
of the Serbia players grabbed the flag and Albania players tried to protect it.
Several Serbian fans invaded the field and clashed with Albanian players. The
score was 0-0 at the time.

The match was later abandoned ''due to a disturbance on the pitch,'' according
to European football's ruling body, UEFA.

Albanian fans had been barred from attending the match between the Balkan
nations, which have had turbulent relations, mainly over Kosovo, the former
ethnic Albanian-dominated Serbian province that declared independence in 2008.

RONALDO LIFTS PORTUGAL Cristiano Ronaldo scored in injury time to give Portugal
a 1-0 win over Denmark in a tense Euro 2016 qualifier in Group I in Copenhagen.
Ronaldo headed the ball home in the 94th minute after a shot by Ricardo
Quaresma.

IRELAND TIES GERMANY John O'Shea scored in the fourth minute of stoppage time to
give Ireland a 1-1 draw with host Germany, as the World Cup holders suffered
another setback in their 2016 European Championship campaign.

Toni Kroos scored in the second half to put Germany ahead as it sought to bounce
back from a loss to Poland.

In Warsaw, Poland drew, 2-2, with Scotland to remain atop Group D on goal
difference over Ireland, while Georgia won, 3-0, at Gibraltar.

Poland and Ireland have 7 points in three matches, while Germany and Scotland
have 4 each.

NORTHERN IRELAND WINS AGAIN Northern Ireland continued its surprising run in
Euro 2016 qualifying by beating host Greece, 2-0, for its third straight win in
Group F. In other Group F games, Hungary won, 1-0, in the Faeroe Islands while
Romania beat Finland, 2-0, in Helsinki.

PLAYER ACCUSED OF MISCONDUCT The English Football Association said Queens Park
Rangers defender Rio Ferdinand had been charged with misconduct for sending an
offensive post on Twitter. The association said it was alleged that the comment
Ferdinand posted was ''abusive and/or indecent and/or insulting and/or
improper.'' Ferdinand is a member of an F.A. commission looking at how to
improve English football. He has until Oct. 21 to respond to the charge.

NEYMAR SCORES FOUR Neymar celebrated another milestone with Brazil after
becoming one of the few players to score four times in a match for the team.
Neymar scored all four goals in Brazil's 4-0 win over Japan in a friendly in
Singapore.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/15/sports/soccer/drone
-pulling-albanian-flag-sets-off-skirmish-at-euro-qualifier-in-serbia.html

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Confrontations involving players and fans led to the suspension
of a game between Serbia and Albania. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DARKO VOJINOVIC/ASSOCIATED
PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


