                             731 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             April 21, 2014 Monday
                                Suburban Edition

World Digest: April 21, 2014

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 589 words

YEMEN

Suspected al-Qaeda camps targeted

An airstrike targeting suspected al-Qaeda training camps in a rugged mountain
region in southern Yemen killed a number of fighters Sunday, a high-level
government committee said, without specifying a casualty figure.

The Supreme Security Committee, which includes Yemen's defense and interior
ministers and its intelligence chief, said the airstrike hit the Mahfad
mountains between Abyan and Shabwa provinces. But the statement did not identify
who carried out the attack. The United States regularly conducts drone strikes
in Yemen against the local al-Qaeda branch, which Washington considers the
terrorist network's most active in the world.

It was the second strike targeting al-Qaeda in two days. A suspected U.S. drone
hit in Bayda province in southern Yemen on Saturday killed at least nine
suspected al-Qaeda militants and three civilians. The Supreme Security Committee
said, however, that Yemeni forces carried out that airstrike.

- Associated Press

SYRIA

Assad vows to protect Christian minority

Syria's president marked Easter with a tour Sunday of an ancient Christian
village that his forces recently captured from rebels, an important symbolic
prize for his government ahead of presidential elections.

Bashar al-Assad's visit to Maaloula, about 40 miles northeast of Damascus,
serves as a propaganda victory for his government in its quest to be seen as
protector of religious minorities.

Assad vowed to defend Christians - who made up about 10 percent of Syria's
prewar population of 23 million - and protect churches, which he said are part
of the country's cultural heritage. Syria's civil war has seen Islamist
extremists and radical foreign fighters join the fight and target Christians.

- Associated Press

MALAYSIA

Money talk offends Flight 370 families

Deputy Foreign Affairs Minister Hamzah Zainuddin met Sunday with relatives of
passengers who were aboard missing Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 and discussed
ways of providing them with financial assistance.

The relatives, however, expressed dissatisfaction with the meeting, saying in a
statement that until there is "at least a tiny bit of concrete evidence" that
the plane crashed, authorities should not try to settle the case with final
payoffs.

"No meaningful report on the progress of the investigation was given" at the
meeting, the relatives said, adding that "not a single one" of their questions
was answered.

- Associated Press

Insurgents attack military convoy in Algeria: Islamist insurgents ambushed an
Algerian military convoy in a mountainous region, killing 11 soldiers and
wounding five others, the Defense Ministry said. But a hospital official said
that at least five others died from injuries.

Kuwaiti court suspends two newspapers' operations:  A court in Kuwait has
temporarily suspended the publication of two independent newspapers over
articles about a secret investigation into allegations of a plot to topple the
Persian Gulf monarchy's government, the state news agency reported. Kuwait
prides itself on its press freedoms, but denouncing the Western-backed emir is
illegal.

Art dealer accused of fraud is arrested in Spain:  A Spanish businessman
suspected of having dealt in millions of dollars' worth of fake art was arrested
during Easter festivities in southern Spain, officials said. José Carlos
BergantiÃ±os DÃ­az is wanted on fraud charges in the United States. Glafira
Rosales, his partner, was arraigned in New York in August, accused of peddling
counterfeit art for 15 years.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


