                             732 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              May 11, 2014 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

U.S. officers killed two armed Yemeni civilians

BYLINE: Ernesto LondoÃ±o

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 584 words


A Central Intelligence Agency officer and a U.S. Special Operations commando
fatally shot two armed Yemenis last month during a botched kidnapping attempt in
a commercial district of the volatile country, U.S. officials confirmed this
weekend.

The Americans opened fire on armed Yemeni civilians to escape an apparent
abduction attempt at a barbershop, a U.S. official said Saturday.

The U.S. embassy in Yemen has been operating on reduced capacity in recent days
as U.S. officials there have sought to limit the movement and exposure of their
personnel amid a flurry of threat warnings.

The State Department confirmed Friday night that it had flown out the two
officials after the incident, which was first reported Friday night by the New
York Times.

"We can confirm that, last month, two U.S. Embassy officers in Yemen fired their
weapons after being confronted by armed individuals in an attempted kidnapping
at a small commercial business district in Sanaa," State Department spokeswoman
Marie Harf said in a statement. "Two of the armed individuals were killed."

Officials at the Pentagon and the CIA declined to comment on the incident.

The shooting made news in Yemen when it occurred a couple of weeks ago, but
local reports did not identify the targets of the apparent kidnapping attempt as
U.S. officials.

The Yemeni government has welcomed - and at times pleaded for - U.S. assistance
to fight al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, an offshoot of the original terror
group that is among the most worrisome to Washington because the group has
plotted attacks against Western civilian targets. But the robust
counterterrorism cooperation is rendered discreetly, in large part because many
Yemenis deplore U.S. drone strikes.

A senior U.S. official said the Americans were flown out of Yemen shortly after
the shooting with the acquiescence of local officials.

"There was no conflict with the Yemeni government when they left," the official
said. "It was done with the acknowledgment of the government."

Disclosure of the incident coincided with fresh signs of deteriorating security
in Yemen, where a weak government has struggled to battle Islamist insurgents
linked to al-Qaeda.

According to local news reports, at least seven people were gunned down Friday
after assailants opened fire at two checkpoints that lead to the presidential
palace. Meanwhile, militants ambushed the convoy carrying the country's defense
minister outside the capital.

Yemen has been among the least permissive environments for U.S. officials in
recent years. American military and intelligence personnel have played a crucial
role in counterterrorism efforts in Yemen, regularly striking suspected
militants with drones and providing support to the country's fledgling security
forces.

U.S. personnel in the capital live in a fortified building that used to be part
of the Sheraton Hotel chain. Their movements outside the living quarters and the
heavily guarded embassy are tightly limited.

U.S. officials would not say whether the Americans involved in the shooting were
abiding by security rules when the incident occurred. Although U.S. diplomats
are required to adhere to stringent security rules in conflict zones,
intelligence personnel and special operators with advanced weapons training are
often given more leeway.

"Per standard procedure for any such incident involving Embassy officers
overseas, this matter is under review," Harf said in the statement.

ernesto.londono@washpost.com

Greg Miller contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


