                             742 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 11, 2014 Friday
                                Regional Edition

World Digest: July 10, 2014

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 641 words

PAKISTAN

6 militants killed in suspected U.S. strike

A suspected U.S. drone fired two missiles at a compound in a troubled Pakistani
tribal region Thursday, killing six militants, two intelligence officials said.

The strike occurred in the town of Datta Khel in North Waziristan, where the
Pakistani military last month launched an offensive against the Pakistani
Taliban, al-Qaeda and other militants, the officials said.

U.S. drone strikes are a serious source of tension between Washington and
Islamabad. The Pakistani government regularly denounces the strikes as a
violation of the country's sovereignty.

- Associated Press

IRAN

Foreign ministers set to join nuclear talks

U.S. Secretary of State John F. Kerry and his counterparts from the other world
powers negotiating with Iran on its nuclear program will travel to Vienna this
weekend to help break the logjam in the talks, a senior Western official said
Thursday.

Iran and the powers - the United States, France, Germany, Britain, Russia and
China - aim to reach a long-term deal to end the decade-old standoff by a July
20 deadline. Many diplomats and analysts say an extension may be needed, given
the wide gaps in negotiating positions. Earlier this week, diplomats close to
the talks said the ministers may end up negotiating the terms of an extension
while in Vienna.

The West believes Iran has been seeking to develop the capability to make
nuclear  bombs. Iran says its nuclear program is an entirely peaceful project to
generate electricity.

- Reuters

UKRAINE

Land mine explosion, ambush kill 3 troops

Ukrainian forces regained more ground but suffered casualties Thursday in
clashes with separatists, while Western allies urged Russian President Vladimir
Putin to put more pressure on the rebels for a negotiated end to the conflict.

Government forces have recently gained the upper hand in the three-month-old
conflict in eastern Ukraine. Military spokesman Vladislav Seleznyov said
security forces on Thursday retook the town of Siversk as separatists fled.

One soldier was killed in an ambush of an army convoy near Luhansk. Two others
died when an armored personnel carrier was blown up by a land mine in a village
near Donetsk.

Meanwhile, French President FranÃ§ois Hollande and German Chancellor Angela
Merkel urged Putin by telephone to "exert all necessary pressure on the
separatists to bring them to negotiate effectively," a statement from Hollande's
office said.

- Reuters

Turkish parliament gives legal recognition to talks with Kurds:  Turkey's
parliament approved a legal framework for peace talks with Kurdish militants, a
key step toward ending a three-decade-old insurgency a month before a
presidential election. Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan is hoping to pick up
Kurdish support as he bids to become Turkey's first directly elected president.
Turkey began talks with jailed Kurdish militant leader Abdullah Ocalan in 2012.
Until now, however, there were few legal provisions for negotiating with
Ocalan's banned Kurdistan Workers' Party -deemed a terrorist group by Turkey,
the European Union and the United States .

Taliban kills six de-miners in Afghanistan:  The Taliban fatally shot six people
working for a de-mining company in western Afghanistan, police said. The
de-miners from the Halo Trust land-mine clearance organization were on an
operation in Herat province's Kohsan district, police said. The militants
reportedly alsoabducted three people. Authorities said a manhunt was underway.

Shootouts in southern Mexico kill 13:  Officials say 12 criminal suspects and
one police officer have died in two days of running gun battles in the southern
Mexican town of Chilapa. Prosecutors in Guerrero state said a downtown gunfight
left six suspects and one state police officer dead, while five gunmen and one
woman died in another gun battle.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


