                             753 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 23, 2014 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

Amnesty hits home

BYLINE: Krissah Thompson

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1287 words


Here is some of what Steven Hawkins is thinking about these days: Drone strikes
in Pakistan. Protests in Hong Kong. And the death of Michael Brown, the unarmed
teenager who was shot by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo., this summer.

These are all, Hawkins believes, pressing human rights issues.

And the New York University-trained lawyer, who was named executive director of
Amnesty International's U.S. operations a little more than a year ago, has plans
to tackle each one.

Along with releasing a report titled "Â 'Will I Be Next?' U.S. Drone Strikes in
Pakistan," Hawkins has focused his organization on gun violence in urban areas
and sent delegations of Amnesty observers to Ferguson, where protests have
continued since Brown was killed in August.

Amnesty has been critical of the use of lethal force in Brown's case and had no
immediate reaction to reports this week that an autopsy backed up law
enforcement accounts of a physical confrontation between Brown and the officer
beforeBrown was shot. Hawkins and other Amnesty officials have held the view
that because Brown was unarmed, he was unlikely to have presented a threat to
the officer's life.

In focusing on Ferguson, Hawkins likes to say that he is "bringing human rights
home. We should care equally about a child in Syria trying to get to a refugee
camp and not being shot, and a child in Chicago going to school not being shot."

For the past several months, he has been spreading his message and drawing fresh
attention to Amnesty. His team's bright yellow T-shirts drew both news cameras
and local attention in Ferguson. But generally, Amnesty in the United States has
never been the force that it is in other parts of the world. In this country,
its dues-paying members number 300,000. Globally, the organization tallies 3.5
million.

When Hawkins, 52, who is the first African American to lead Amnesty in the
United States, speaks in terms of human rights within domestic civil rights
circles, he often hears, "Isn't that work done over there?"

A pitch to students

During a recent lecture at Howard University's law school, Hawkins encouraged
the historically black university's students to see Amnesty's work and human
rights as their own calling. The organization, which was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1977 for its campaign against torture, made its name by working for the
release of political prisoners.

Speaking emphatically to a crowd of about 200 law students in a lecture hall on
campus, Hawkins was more lawyerly than charming. He wore an attorney's suit,
plain and not flashy, and explained to the students that human rights cannot
just be "over there" - it's here in the United States, too.

"Where do we start?" he asked rhetorically before tracing the historic break
between the United States and many other developed countries in the way human
rights law is viewed.

The divergence, he argued, dates to the early 1950s, when black civil rights
activists, including W.E.B. Du Bois, petitioned the United Nations in a scathing
report titled, "We Charge Genocide: The Crime of Government Against the Negro
People." It focused on lynching, which was then a scourge. Between 1882 and
1951, more than 3,300 blacks were lynched in the United States, according to the
Tuskegee Institute. The report, which relied on data from the NAACP, was
immediately controversial, even among liberals, because of the petitioners' ties
to communism and radical politics. Eleanor Roosevelt, who was then the U.S.
delegate to the U.N. General Assembly, refused to support it. Ultimately, the
United Nations did not act on the petition.

Dominique Wales, a Howard law student who attended Hawkins's talk, says she is
helping to connect the dots from past to present. "As we can see from the events
that took place in Ferguson recently, human rights advocacy is not only relevant
today - it's necessary," she says.

Hawkins told the students that in the decades between the failed U.N. petition
and today's street protests, U.S. civil rights organizations remained
disconnected from the global human rights infrastructure.

Amnesty itself was not as focused on perceived abuses in the United States until
about a decade ago. Following the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, Amnesty
International became more critical of the U.S. war on terrorism. In 2005, the
organization released a report in which its secretary general referred to the
United States as an "unrivaled political, military and economic hyper-power"
that "thumbs its nose at the rule of law and human rights."

That was a key turning point. For most of its existence, Amnesty USA worked to
call attention to human rights abuses abroad. But that thinking is shifting,
says Jan Black, a professor at the Monterey Institute of International Studies
and a member of Amnesty USA's board.

"We as a country have slipped into routine abuse of human rights on many
fronts," she argues.

Hawkins cut his teeth as a young lawyer at the NAACP Legal Defense and
Educational Fund, where he handled capital punishment cases. That positions him
well to keep the focus on challenges faced in the United States. "I began to see
my work in the U.S. as being that of a human rights defender," Hawkins says.

After his work with the NAACP, he led a nonprofit group dedicated to ending the
death penalty. Hawkins appealed to global human rights standards and often noted
that a minority of countries impose capital punishment. As of this year, there
are at least 40 such countries, including the United States.

A Ferguson presence

The moment that crystallized Amnesty's new approach came when Hawkins and the
team of Amnesty USA delegates flew to Ferguson to act as observers in the days
following Michael Brown's killing. Hawkins ticks off what he calls the human
rights violations he found there: Children and the elderly were tear-gassed;
there was no medical staff on hand as police used the tear gas; and the right to
peacefully protest was violated.

He walked the streets and witnessed arrests. At a organizational meeting later,
he spoke with his counterpart in Brazil, where Amnesty has focused on the
militarization of that country's police force. "I held up photos of the police
in Ferguson and he held up photos of the Brazilian police, and they were nearly
identical," Hawkins says, referring to the military gear that has been acquired
by local police departments in both countries.

"It's reductive to think of this in terms of civil rights," says Rachel O'Leary,
who has led Amnesty USA's delegations in Ferguson and was on the ground there
with Hawkins.

Local leaders in the St. Louis suburb have sometimes eyed Amnesty's entrance
into their burgeoning protest movement warily.

"My impression of them is that they are teethless," says Chris King, editor of
the St. Louis American, the area's historically black newspaper. "It's basically
like a young dreamers' type of organization." Amnesty's presence "did bolster
people's sense that they were being treated criminally in an international
light."

Amnesty and its yellow T-shirts will be back in Ferguson this weekend. On
Friday, the organization is to release a report that includes its critique of
the law-enforcement response to protesters in Ferguson. It begins as Hawkins
would have it, by placing the protest movement squarely among global "human
rights concerns, including the right to life, the use of lethal force by law
enforcement, the right to freedom from discrimination, and the rights to freedom
of expression and assembly."

krissah.thompson@washpost.com

Amnesty International

Amnesty International

Amnesty International representatives, including Steven Hawkins, executive
director of U.S. operations, far left, spent time among protesters in Ferguson,
Mo. in August.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


