                             752 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 12, 2014 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

World Digest: Oct. 11, 2014

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 677 words

CHINA

Protesters issueopen letter to Xi

Students leading pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong issued an open letter
Saturday to Chinese President Xi Jinping, urging him to consider political
reforms in the city and blaming the city's unpopular leader for the
demonstrations.

The letter, released by two student groups leading the protests, said Hong Kong
Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying was responsible for the civil disobedience
campaign of the past two weeks.

"Students walked out of classes and are occupying different places now because
Leung and others have repeatedly ignored what the people want," the letter read.
"If the central government is confident, it should not be afraid to let Hong
Kong people elect their own chief executive."

Thousands of demonstrators showed up in the main protest zone Saturday, two days
after Hong Kong's government called off scheduled negotiations with students who
are demanding that voters have a greater say in choosing the city's leader in
2017 elections. The protesters have vowed to keep up the demonstrations until
the government responds to their demands.

- Associated Press

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

President meets with Christian militia

The Central African Republic's transitional president, Catherine Samba-Panza,
opened talks Saturday with leaders of a Christian militia who have called for
her government to resign, a spokeswoman said, trying to put a stop to days of
heavy violence that killed one U.N. peacekeeper and injured more than a dozen
others.

The country has been rocked by violence since the mostly Muslim Seleka rebel
coalition last year toppled the president of a decade, installing their leader,
Michel Djotodia, as head of state. Widespread human rights abuses committed by
Seleka led to the formation of the anti-Balaka Christian militia.

Djotodia resigned in January amid an international outcry over escalating
violence.

- Associated Press

U.S. carries out drone strike, Pakistani officials say:  A U.S. drone strike
killed two suspected militants in northwest Pakistan on Saturday, Pakistani
intelligence officials said. The attack on a vehicle in the Shawal area near the
border with Afghanistan marked the seventh strike in the past week and the 16th
this year. The increase in attacks comes after a six-month hiatus when the
Pakistani government pursued fruitless peace talks with Taliban militants.

India orders evacuation ahead of Cyclone Hudhud:  Indian authorities were
evacuating hundreds of thousands of people Saturday as a powerful cyclone swept
through the Bay of Bengal and headed toward the country's east coast. Officials
were stockpiling emergency supplies, and rescue workers were on standby along
the coastlines of Andhra Pradesh and Orissa states. Cyclone Hudhud was expected
to make landfall near the port city of Visakhapatnam around noon Sunday.

Shiite group to boycott Bahrain elections:  Bahrain's main opposition Shiite
group formally announced Saturday that it will boycott the country's November
parliamentary elections. Al-Wefaq and three other groups in the National
Democratic Opposition Parties said they will boycott elections because they
think the government has not engaged in genuine reconciliation efforts.

Thousands protest water tax in Ireland:  At least 15,000 people rallied against
new water charges in Dublin on Saturday in Ireland's biggest anti-austerity
protest for years, as a candidate campaigning against the tax won a seat in
Parliament. The show of defiance against the tax, which will cost households
hundreds of euros a year, is a significant challenge to the government days
before it unveils a new budget.

Hundreds attend funeral for former Haitian dictator:  Hundreds of people
attended the funeral Saturday of former Haitian dictator Jean-Claude "Baby Doc"
Duvalier. Duvalier became president of Haiti in 1971 at age 19 when his father,
dictator FranÃ§ois "Papa Doc" Duvalier, died of a sudden illness. "Baby Doc"
presided over a regime widely acknowledged as brutal and corrupt until he was
ousted by a popular uprising in 1986.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


