                             774 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Opinionator)

                            January 19, 2014 Sunday

Fifty States of Fear

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 2849 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Is our government trying to minimize our worries about terrorism, or
manipulating them to consolidate its power?


The British philosopher Bertrand Russell, writing as World War II was drawing to
a close in Europe, observed that "neither a man nor a crowd nor a nation can be
trusted to act humanely or to think sanely under the influence of a great fear."
Russell's point was that irrational fear can propel us into counterproductive
activities, ranging from unjust wars and the inhumane treatment of others to
more mundane cases like our failure to seize opportunities to improve our
everyday lives.

It is hard to dispute Russell's claim. We all know that fear can impair our
judgment. We have passed up opportunities in our personal lives and we have also
seen groups and nations do great harm and unravel because of their irrational
fears. The 20th century was littered with wars and ethnic cleansings that were
propelled in large measure by fear of a neighboring state or political or ethnic
group. Given this obvious truth, one might suppose that modern democratic
states, with the lessons of history at hand, would seek to minimize fear - or at
least minimize its effect on deliberative decision-making in both foreign and
domestic policy.

But today the opposite is frequently true. Even democracies founded in the
principles of liberty and the common good often take the path of more
authoritarian states. They don't work to minimize fear, but use it to exert
control over the populace and serve the government's principle aim:
consolidating power.

Philosophers have long noted the utility of fear to the state. Machiavelli
notoriously argued that a good leader should induce fear in the populace in
order to control the rabble.

Hobbes in "The Leviathan" argued that fear effectively motivates the creation of
a social contract in which citizens cede their freedoms to the sovereign. The
people understandably want to be safe from harm. The ruler imposes security and
order in exchange for the surrender of certain public freedoms. As Hobbes saw
it, there was no other way: Humans, left without a strong sovereign leader
controlling their actions, would degenerate into mob rule. It is the fear of
this state of nature - not of the sovereign per se, but of a world without the
order the sovereign can impose - that leads us to form the social contract and
surrender at least part of our freedom.

Most philosophers have since rejected this Hobbesian picture of human nature and
the need for a sovereign. We have learned that democratic states can flourish
without an absolute ruler. The United States of America was the original proof
of concept of this idea: Free, self-governing people can flourish without a
sovereign acting above the law. Even though the United States has revoked
freedoms during wartime (and for some groups in peacetime), for most of its
history the people have not been under the yoke of an all-powerful sovereign.

However, since 9/11 leaders of both political parties in the United States have
sought to consolidate power by leaning not just on the danger of a terrorist
attack, but on the fact that the possible perpetrators are frightening
individuals who are not like us. As President George W. Bush put it before a
joint session of Congress in 2001: "They hate our freedoms: our freedom of
religion, our freedom of speech, our freedom to vote and assemble and disagree
with each other." Last year President Obama brought the enemy closer to home,
arguing in a speech at the National Defense University that "we face a real
threat from radicalized individuals here in the United States" - radicalized
individuals who were "deranged or alienated individuals - often U.S. citizens or
legal residents."

The Bush fear-peddling is usually considered the more extreme, but is it? The
Obama formulation puts the "radicalized individuals" in our midst. They could be
American citizens or legal residents. And the subtext is that if we want to
catch them we need to start looking within. The other is among us. The pretext
for the surveillance state is thus established.

And let there be no mistake about the consolidation of power in the form of the
new surveillance state. Recent revelations by Edward Snowden have shown an
unprecedented program of surveillance both worldwide and on the American
population. Even Erik Prince, the founder of the private military contractor
Blackwater Worldwide thinks the security state has gone too far:

America is way too quick to trade freedom for the illusion of security. Whether
it's allowing the N.S.A. to go way too far in what it intercepts of our personal
data, to our government monitoring of everything domestically and spending way
more than we should. I don't know if I want to live in a country where lone wolf
and random terror attacks are impossible 'cause that country would look more
like North Korea than America.

The widespread outrage over the new surveillance state has been great enough
that President Obama announced on Friday that he would scale back some of its
programs, but he remained strident in his overall support for aggressive
surveillance.

The interesting thing about the security measures that are taken today is that
they provide, as Prince puts it, the "illusion of security"; another way to put
it is that they provide "security theater." Or perhaps it is actually a theater
of fear.

During the George W. Bush administration we were treated to the color-coded
terror threat meter. It was presented as a way to keep us secure, but constantly
wavering between orange and red, it was arguably a device to remind us to be
fearful. Similarly for the elaborate Transportation Security Administration
screenings at airports. Security experts are clear that these procedures are not
making us safe, and that they are simply theater. The only question is whether
the theater is supposed to make us feel safer or whether it is actually intended
to remind us that we are somehow in danger. The security expert Bruce Schneier
suggests it is the latter:

By sowing mistrust, by stripping us of our privacy - and in many cases our
dignity - by taking away our rights, by subjecting us to arbitrary and
irrational rules, and by constantly reminding us that this is the only thing
between us and death by the hands of terrorists, the T.S.A. and its ilk are
sowing fear. And by doing so, they are playing directly into the terrorists'
hands.

The goal of terrorism is not to crash planes, or even to kill people; the goal
of terrorism is to cause terror. ... But terrorists can only do so much. They
cannot take away our freedoms. They cannot reduce our liberties. They cannot, by
themselves, cause that much terror. It's our reaction to terrorism that
determines whether or not their actions are ultimately successful. That we allow
governments to do these things to us - to effectively do the terrorists' job for
them - is the greatest harm of all.

As the Norwegian philosopher Lars Svendsen notes in his book "A Philosophy of
Fear," Hobbes already anticipated the need for the sovereign to manipulate our
fears. The state, Svendsen writes, "has to convince the people that certain
things should be feared rather than others, since the people will not, just like
that, fear what is appropriate from the point of view of the state. Hobbes
points out that this can necessitate a certain amount of staging by the state,
which magnifies certain phenomena and diminishes others."

One way in which our fears can be manipulated by the government is to lead us to
fear the lesser danger. Schneier provides a simple example of this: 9/11 caused
people to irrationally fear air travel and led them to the much more dangerous
route of traveling in automobiles.

Another such example of this misdirection of fear took place in the case of the
Boston Marathon bombings on April 15, in which the Boston Police Department
effectively imposed martial law and seized control of people's homes and used
them as command posts in their effort to apprehend the perpetrators. The
bombings were terrible (three people died and more than 260 were injured), but
just two days later another terrible thing happened: a giant explosion in a
fertilizer plant in Texas killed at least 14 people and injured more than 160.
For a moment we held our collective breath. Could it have been terrorists?

When we learned that it was probably an accident caused by the ignition of
stored ammonium nitrate, a collective sigh of relief was heard, and then not
another word about the event. But why? And what if the explosion in that factory
was part of a larger problem of industrial safety? In fact, according to a
report by the United States Congressional Research Service, thousands of
industrial facilities across the country risk similar harm to nearby
populations.

Meanwhile, 300,000 residents of West Virginia were without safe drinking water
last week after 7,500 gallons of 4-methylcyclohexane methanol leaked into the
Elk River from an industrial storage tank at a plant owned by a company called
Freedom Industries. Few, if any, of the Sunday TV talk shows discussed the
matter, but imagine the fear that would have been pedaled on those shows if
terrorists had poisoned the water of those 300,000 Americans. Of course the
danger is the same whether the cause is terrorism or corporate indifference and
malfeasance.

Dangers are not limited to large scale events. In 2012, according to the Bureau
of Labor Statistics, 4,383 workers were killed on the job, and it has been at
this level or higher since 9/11. In other words, we suffer a 9/11 every year in
terms of workplace fatalities.

But the problem is not limited to workplace deaths. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. estimates
another 50,000 die every year from occupational diseases. And none of this
accounts for the thousands of workers who are permanently disabled each year.

In total, 54,000 Americans die every year due to work-related illnesses and
accidents. This is the equivalent of 148 deathsÂ each day; in terms of fatalities
it is rroughly a Boston Marathon bombing every half hour of every day.

But while we spend more than 7 billion dollars a year on the T.S.A.'s national
security theater in which over 58,000 T.S.A. employees make sure we are not
carrying too much toothpaste or shampoo onto airplanes, the budget for the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration is under $600,000 per year. It
seems that our threat assessments are flawed.

We are conditioned to fear persons in caves in Pakistan but not the destruction
of our water supply by frackers, massive industrial accidents, climate change or
the work-related deaths of 54,000 American workers every year. Fear of outside
threats has led us to ignore the more real dangers from within.

Fear has also driven us to wage a "war on terror" that, as the political writer
Jeremy Scahill has shown in his book "Dirty Wars," creates still more enemies.
As Scahill describes the results, the United States Special Forces kill lists of
seven targets gave rise to kill lists of hundreds, which in turn gave rise to
kill lists of thousands today. Does it not occur to the United States that the
drone strikes and assassinations are creating more terrorists than they are
neutralizing? Perhaps it has, but the calculation has been made that it does not
matter. The newly minted enemies can be used to gin up more fear, more
restrictions on our freedoms, and so the cycle goes. Â One might argue that the
United States has become a government of fear, by fear, and ultimately, for
fear.

Obama's drone wars also arise from Hobbesian assumptions about society - that
the sovereign, enlisted to impose order, is above the law. The sovereign is free
to do whatever is in his power to impose order. If the United States must be in
charge of providing order in the world, then its sovereign is above the law.
Here lie the roots of so-called American exceptionalism.

Svendsen describes the dynamic thus: "The social contract is absolutely binding
on all citizens, but the sovereign himself is not subject to the contract that
he undertakes to guarantee. Similarly, the U.S. is conceived as being the
guarantor of a civilized world, as the country that can maintain moral order,
but that stands outside this order." Fear is driving the United States to
believe it is above the law.

Fear is even used to prevent us from questioning the decisions supposedly being
made for our safety. The foundation of this approach in our government can be
traced back to burning rubble of the World Trade Center, exemplified by this
statement by John Ashcroft, then the attorney general of the United States, in
December 2001: "To those who scare peace-loving people with phantoms of lost
liberty, my message is this. Your tactics only aid terrorists, for they erode
our national unity and diminish our resolve. They give ammunition to America's
enemies, and pause to America's friends."

As Svendsen points out, Ashcroft's reasoning is straight out of the playbook of
the German legal philosopher Carl Schmitt, who was notorious for defending
Hitler's extrajudicial killings of his political enemies. Schmitt too felt that
national unity was critical and that liberty should be subjugated to safety.
Svendsen writes:

A political act consists in maintaining one's own existence and destroying those
that threaten it, and there is little room for overcoming conflicts via
discussion. Such political action is the sole right of the state, and in order
to maintain itself the state must also eliminate all enemies within, that is,
all those who do not fit into a homogeneous unity. Every genuine political
theory, according to Schmitt, must assume that man is evil, that man is a
dangerous being. It is here, in the fear of what humans can do to each other,
that the state finds the justification of its own existence - the ability of the
state to protect one is the argument for submitting to it.

Fear is a primal human state. From childhood on, we fear the monsters of our
imaginations, lurking in dark closets, under beds, in deserted alleyways, but we
also now fear monsters in the deserts of Yemen and the mountains of Pakistan.
But perhaps it is possible to pause and subdue our fears by carefully observing
reality - just as we might advise for trying to calm and comfort a fear-stricken
child. We might find that, in reality, the more immediate danger to our
democratic society comes from those who lurk in the halls of power in Washington
and other national capitols and manipulate our fears to their own ends.

What are these ends? They are typically the protection of moneyed interests. In
1990, the Secretary of State James Baker tried to make the case for the first
Gulf War on economic grounds. "The economic lifeline of the industrial world,"
he said, "runs from the gulf and we cannot permit a dictator such as this to sit
astride that economic lifeline."

That rationale, although honest, did not resonate with the American people - it
hardly seemed to justify war. The George W. Bush administration abandoned the
economic justification and turned to fear as a motivator. We were told that
Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction. If we did not act against him,
the national security adviser Condoleezza Rice argued, the next thing we would
see might be a "mushroom cloud."

This playbook of fear has not been limited to motivating military actions.
Environmentalists, once ridiculed as "tree-huggers" are now often characterized
as "environmental terrorists" - as individuals we should fear and neutralize.
The hacktivist Jeremy Hammond, who exposed the nefarious dealings of the private
intelligence corporation Stratfor and its clients, was characterized as someone
seeking to cause "mayhem" by Federal District Judge Loretta Preska when she
sentenced him to 10 years in prison.

In each case, the images of mushroom clouds, environmental terrorists and agents
of mayhem were used to justify actions that would otherwise seem excessive - all
in the service of protecting corporate interests.

Whatever their motivation, by using fear to induce the rollback of individual
rights, politicians, judges and lawmakers are working against the hard-won
democratic principles and ideals that we and other democracies have defended for
almost 250 years. They are manipulating our fears to undo centuries of
democratic reform. And it doesn't matter if the empowered leader is called a
king or a prime minister or a president; the end result is that fear has been
used to place us back under the yoke of Hobbes's sovereign and Machiavelli's
prince.

Yet ultimately we are not powerless. We can resist the impulse to be afraid. We
may not at the moment have answers to the very real dangers that we face in this
world, but we can begin to identify those dangers and seek solutions once we
overcome our fear. Or as Bertrand Russell rather more elegantly put it, as World
War II was drawing to a close, "to conquer fear is the beginning of wisdom."

Peter Ludlow, a professor of philosophy at Northwestern University, writes
frequently on digital culture, hacktivism and the surveillance state.


     Â·    In Praise of Failure
     Â·    The Banality of Systemic Evil
     Â·    The Real War on Reality
     Â·    The Moral Hazard of Drones
     Â·    The Cycle of Revenge


LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


