                             780 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            June 18, 2014 Wednesday

Facebook Makes Its Own Computer Networking Switch

BYLINE: QUENTIN HARDY

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 768 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â The social media giant has a hobby of lowering the costs in data
center, where proprietary technologies still do most of the work.
Facebook&#8217;s open-source networking switch is designed to challenge that.


In pretty short order, Facebook is out to shake up big parts of what makes the
Internet go.

On Wednesday, the social media giant announced that it had created a new kind of
computer networking switch, potentially capable of shifting data rapidly through
the largest data centers.

The machine also blends functions of a computer server within a network device,
which could make it a much easier product for lots of engineers to work with.

It could be a big deal, since a successful product like this could threaten the
market control, and profit margins, of companies like Cisco, Hewlett-Packard and
Arista Networks. Facebook built the product in modules and plans to make it
available through open source by the end of this year. It could make networking,
one of the last great arcane computer engineering disciplines,  go mainstream.

"The bigger strategy here is to get computer networking out of the black box,
black operations part of the world," said Najam Ahmad, vice president of network
engineering at Facebook. "We have tons of software engineers at Facebook, they
can all work on network stuff now."

The switch,called "Wedge," is designed to work with other commercial and
open-source networking products. It is initially designed to work at speeds of
up to 40 gigabits per second, the upper end of what most network switches now
carry, but will move to 100 gigabits in the near future. Mr. Ahmad said Facebook
had already seen interest from Microsoft, Goldman Sachs and Bloomberg, among
others, in working with the product.

Traditional networking companies, he added, will likely be forced to shift their
strategies, since in time even ordinary business customers may be drawn to the
cheaper mass networking boxes.

"The industry is thinking about how they will play in this market," he said,
noting that Dell is working with an open-source networking system called
Cumulus, which like Wedge works with  semiconductors available  commercially.
Cumulus can also work with parts of Wedge.

"Cisco is looking at this, Arista is looking at this," he said. "It presents
challenges to an appliance-based model of selling networking. If you are
committed to that over time, you'll be limited to severing smaller businesses."
Quanta, a Taiwanese maker of computer equipment, is one of several manufacturers
looking at Wedge, Mr. Ahmad said.

Facebook has been making hardware available as open  source for several years,
under a project called Open Compute that has attracted many companies in and out
of the tech sector. The idea is to lower  the costs of computing hardware the
way the Linux open source project lowered the costs of operating system
software: by sharing ideas and allowing the maximum number of people to work on
new designs.

Initially, the work was limited to standardizing the sizes of racks that held
computer servers, or the wiring between boxes. Facebook's work, however, is
increasingly more sophisticated.

Facebook's founder and chief executive officer, Mark Zuckerberg, has been clear
that his intentions are not exclusively altruistic: Facebook trailed Amazon and
Google in the race to build giant data centers, and could not afford the
proprietary approach taken by those two companies.

No doubt, Wedge is still in the earliest testing phases. Facebook likes to run
products on a large scale before it makes them available through open source,
and things could still go wrong with this switch.

There is no mistaking the company's intentions, however. Speaking at an industry
event Wednesday, Jay Parikh, Facebook's vice president of engineering, talked
about recent acquisitions and their role in Facebook's future.

Companies like Oculus VR, makers of virtual reality goggles, and Ascenta, a
drone company that Facebook hopes will deliver Internet connectivity to remote
locations via laser, are part of an even larger strategy, he said.

"The last three or four years we focused on scaling up the main Facebook
application," he said. "In the last year or so we've been investing in longer
term tech bets - things three, five, 10 years out." The Oculus virtual reality
chip would be used for augmented reality, a way of tagging the physical world
with Internet information, he said, while the drones would connect 20 percent of
the world's population.

Facebook is also increasingly interested in so-called "deep learning," an
advanced form of big data analysis that is growing popular in the biggest tech
companies.

In making all this a reality, Mr. Parikh said, "one building block, the network,
was slowing us down." Facebook's answer was to take away proprietary control.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


