                             783 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Dot Earth)

                            September 5, 2014 Friday

A Whale of a Recovery for California's Blue Whales

BYLINE: ANDREW C. REVKIN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 661 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Blue whale populations off the West Coast appear to be approaching
pre-slaughter abundance.


The blue whale, the biggest animal on the planet, was hunted with abandon in the
Pacific Ocean until the early 1970s. The species has been rebounding ever since,
but a slowdown in the growth of the population frequenting waters off the
California coast was a concern. Now it turns out to be a promising sign of
recovery.

Scientists at the University of Washington have just published research finding
that the West Coast blue whale population of around 2,200 individuals appears to
be approaching its pre-slaughter size, with the slowing growth a function of the
carrying capacity of the marine ecosystem. Collisions with ships remain a
problem, the scientists write, but should not affect the whales' prospects.

The paper - "Do ship strikes threaten the recovery of endangered eastern North
Pacific blue whales?" - was posted online today by the journal Marine Mammal
Science. Here's the core of the abstract:

We used a population dynamics model to assess the trends and status of ENP
[eastern North Pacific] blue whales, and the effects of ship strikes. We
estimate the population likely never dropped below 460 individuals, and is at
97% of carrying capacity (95% interval 62%-99%). These results suggest density
dependence, not ship strikes, is the key reason for the observed lack of
increase. We also estimate future strikes will likely have a minimal impact; for
example, an 11-fold increase in vessels would lead to a 50% chance the long-term
population would be considered depleted. Although we estimate ship strike
mitigation would have minimal impacts on population trends and status, current
levels of ship strikes are likely above legal limits set by the U.S. The
recovery of ENP blue whales from whaling demonstrates the ability of blue whale
populations to rebuild under careful management.

There's more in a University of Washington news release.

The recovery has helped the state's whale-watching industry. Here's some pretty
remarkable drone video of blue whales off Dana Point (near Laguna Beach) in May,
shot by a whale-watching tour operator:

[Video: Drone Footage of California's Blue Whales  Watch on YouTube.]

As the university news release noted, it's important to keep in mind that the
California recovery is a tiny bright spot given that researchers estimate (from
other work) that the 3,400 whales killed in that population from 1905 to 1971
pale beside the 346,000 harpooned in Antarctic waters in the same span.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration estimates that the Southern
Hemisphere population was 175,000 before the whaling binge and is about 2,000
today.

One of the paper authors, the doctoral candidate Cole Monnahan, has a
fascinating piece on the North Pacific whale research on a great blog he
maintains with another author, Trevor Branch, called Blue Whale News (which I
just discovered via the University of Washington release). In the post, Monnahan
stresses the big questions that remain about the more heavily hunted blue whale
populations in the western North Pacific. Here's the kicker:

So what do we know about the population structure in other areas? In the western
North Pacific, we know there is at least one population that spends a
significant portion of their time, including the mating season, too far west for
our hydrophones to hear them. The truth is no one knows what populations exist
(or existed) in the western North Pacific. Thousands of whales were caught off
Japan early in the 1900s, but none have been seen since. Was that a population
that was killed off forever? Where do the blue whales go during the winter
months to breed? These are exciting questions for future researchers to tackle.

To get a sense of the mix of whaling-era data, tracking and modeling used to
estimate past blue whale abundance, read this PloS ONE paper by an overlapping
research team from last year: "Estimating Historical Eastern North Pacific Blue
Whale Catches Using Spatial Calling Patterns."

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


