                             796 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       July 9, 2014 Wednesday 5:21 PM EST

What a difference the next commander in chief will make

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 485 words


To see what difference a president makes, you need look no further than the
violence raging throughout the Middle East and the lack of U.S. influence.
Certainly, this was a long time in coming, the inevitable result of President
Obama's notion that the United States should retrench and leave the burden of
international stabilizing to others.

The next president will have his or her hands full. On a day-to-day level,
changes or continuity with this president can have huge consequences.

Consider the ban on oil exports. The Post reports:

The European Union is pressing the United States to lift its longstanding ban on
crude oil exports through a sweeping trade and investment deal, according to a
secret document from the negotiations obtained by The Washington Post.

This is a no-brainer for the United States. By opening oil sales and speeding up
LNG exports, we not only help the U.S. economy and undercut Russia, we also
demonstrate that we actually listen to allies. Wasn't that one of Obama's
complaints - that his successor ignored our allies or took a high-handed
approach with them? Whoever follows Obama should reverse this nonsensical and
counterproductive policy. (In the meantime, someone should ask Hillary Clinton
what she thinks about this.)

But the next president might also make things worse on an increasingly important
policy choice: drones. Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) joins the far left in wanting to
severely restrict the use of them to hit American jihadists in remote areas
where we cannot apprehend them. The Post observes:

Travel to Syria by Americans and Europeans to fight in the civil war there has
become a major concern for U.S. and European law enforcement and intelligence
officials. U.S. authorities confirmed last month that a 22-year-old American
from Florida, Moner Mohammad Abusalha, carried out a suicide bombing in Syria in
late May.

All of that is well and good, but some American jihadists will get through to
Syria. Are we supposed to simply wait until they carry out plots against the
homeland (or allies like Israel)? This makes zero sense and conveys the same
lack of appreciation for the jihadist war in which we are engaged as Obama has
displayed. Another president who envisions war against jihadists as simply
another criminal justice matter could well lead toÂ calamitous results in a world
potentially with an Islamic State carved out of territory in the Middle East.

These are two relatively discrete issues but they point to the necessity of
fully vetting presidential contenders on the specifics of their foreign policy.
Republicans serious about running better have detailed and informed answers to
all sorts of questions in addition to energy exports and drones:

The stakes are serious and, unless the GOP puts forth a serious candidate that
voters can envision as commander in chief, Hillary Clinton (or Elizabeth Warren
or whoever) is going to be calling the shots.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


