                              85 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 3, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bird? Plane? No, It's the Wedding Photographer

BYLINE: By MARIANNE ROHRLICH

SECTION: Section ST; Column 0; Society Desk; FIELD NOTES; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1333 words


The next time you go to a wedding, be sure your hair is done, your lipstick is
on, and your Jockeys aren't sticking out of your pants. You never know if a
drone is lurking in the sky about to zoom in and take your picture.

No, not those heavily armed aircraft that the United States military uses to
patrol the skies over Afghanistan and beyond. Couples having large outdoor
weddings have been finding that small, unmanned aerial vehicles, or U.A.V.s,
controlled remotely by operators on the ground, can be a useful if sometimes
problematic tool for snapping aerial images that capture the entire scene and
its participants.

As a small drone noisily swooped over the crowd at the June 21 marriage of Randy
Florke and Sean Patrick Maloney in Cold Spring, N.Y., which was featured in the
New York Times Vows column last month, Huma Abedin, an aide to Hillary Rodham
Clinton, was heard to say, ''That thing is going to kill somebody.''

No one was endangered at the wedding, other than perhaps the pride of Mr.
Maloney, a Democratic representative whose district spans parts of Westchester
and Orange Counties and who sits on the House Transportation and Infrastructure
Aviation Subcommittee. Because that subcommittee oversees the Federal Aviation
Administration, he was taken to task for possibly violating the agency's
guidelines by Nan Hayworth, his Republican challenger in the coming November
election.

In a statement given to The Times last week, Mr. Maloney said, ''Like most
people who are about to get married, I wasn't up-to-date on the lack of
regulations around the emerging technology of a wedding photographer mounting a
camera on a remote control helicopter, and now a month after our wedding, even
more judges have confirmed the absence of laws and regulations.'' The statement,
issued through his chief of staff, Stephanie Formas, continued, ''Every day
another group of photographers, filmmakers, farmers, search and rescue teams, or
researchers are expressing their frustration with the total lack of clarity on a
technology that could save lives or simply take a few wedding photos.''

It is true that these small, unmanned aircraft are increasingly being used to
locate people in wilderness areas, to inexpensively monitor the health of
agricultural fields, and to photograph homes for sale. Wedding photography
represents but a small, developing use for them.

''I didn't know they would be there during the ceremony,'' Vedet Nommaz said of
the drones at his marriage in May to Ellen Matusov in a big wedding in Turkey.
''I almost had a heart attack when I saw one approaching the huppah.'' But once
he had been reassured it was a camera from the wedding photographer, he said,
''I was very happy with the results because they flew high and captured the
entire venue, and they could zoom in and get the ceremony, too.''

Emre Tanyolac, the marketing director for S&S Visual in Istanbul, the company
that worked on the Matusov-Nommaz wedding, said it has been using drones for
about a year. ''It shoots ambience of the wedding more effectively than anything
else,'' he said.

''Everyone is looking for that one great shot,'' said Darcy Miller, the
editorial director of Martha Stewart Weddings. Although Ms. Miller has been to
more weddings than most people, she admits that she has never seen a drone used
at one -- so far, anyway. ''I'm sure everything changes every day with
technology.''

Among photographers and videographers, however, drones and weddings are ''a hot
topic in the industry now,'' said Denis Reggie, an Atlanta-based wedding
photographer who decidedly has not bought into this technology. ''We've seen so
much information about drones, but they're not sanctioned by the F.A.A. yet,''
he said.

Brendan Schulman, a lawyer and special counsel at the law firm Kramer Levin in
Manhattan, where he is a litigator with a specialty in unmanned aircraft
systems, said: ''This is the future of technology. It's not like an airplane
with passengers and fuel on board, and there are no safety issues.'' Mr.
Schulman, who has represented drone pilots in court when they have been
challenged by the F.A.A., reports that Hollywood filmmakers had been using model
airplanes for decades, and yet the agency had never issued guidelines.

That is until 1981, he said, when it did issue some, including recommending not
flying higher than 400 feet or within three miles of an airport. And those were
only voluntary, he noted. Then, in 2007, recognizing that businesses were going
to be using the machines, the agency put out a ''policy statement'' about not
using model aircraft for ''commercial purposes.'' But a policy statement is not
a law, Mr. Schulman said.

Les Dorr, a spokesman for the F.A.A. disputes Mr. Schulman's interpretation,
saying: ''The F.A.A. believes laws and regulations are the same thing. Under the
2012 F.A.A. law, you can fly a model aircraft for hobby or recreational purposes
without authorization from the F.A.A. For any other reason, like commercial
purposes, you need F.A.A. approval.''

This has sowed confusion among couples and their photographers about using
drones at weddings. Nevertheless, the agency and many of the professional
photographers who are choosing to add drones to their arsenal of photo gear,
like Parker Gyokeres, are on the same page when it comes to safety concerns. Mr.
Gyokeres, an active duty United States Air Force photojournalist who was hired
as a subcontractor by the Maloney-Florke wedding's photographer, said, ''I
always have an abort plan, and I never fly my drone out of my sight.'' If he is
within five miles of an airport, he contacts the tower and never flies higher
than 400 feet.

Dale Stierman, the owner of Picture Perfect in Dubuque, Iowa, said, ''I like to
keep my drone over rocks so if it goes down it doesn't hurt anyone,'' adding
that he, like some other photographers, uses a technology built into his machine
that can recall it to its takeoff point.

Things can and do go wrong, however. David Orgill, of Pointe Digital Photography
& Videography in Eagle Mountain, Utah, doesn't use his radio-controlled unmanned
quadcopter carrying a GoPro camera when people are around, but he does fly it
for extra shots, like prewedding pictures of the setting. In August 2013, while
shooting video images of a wedding couple joyously laughing and whirling through
an open field in Wyoming, his drone flew into the groom's head -- a scene played
over and over again by viewers on YouTube. Fortunately, except for an ugly gash
on the side of the groom's face, nothing serious happened. ''There's definitely
risk involved,'' Mr. Orgill said, ''but the couple was good-natured about the
incident and we finished the shoot.''

Couples are starting to find an unfortunate downside. ''The problem is the noise
-- drones are not quiet,'' Mr. Gyokeres said. ''It's great for an overall shot,
but not good during a ceremony.''

Mr. Reggie, whose clients have included members of the Kennedy clan, said, ''I
love the images, but it is inappropriate at a wedding.'' Four motors whirring
around, he said, is incompatible with the sanctity of the moment. ''For me, the
overriding concern at a wedding is not interrupting the quiet.'' He added that
because of the noise factor, ''you get faces looking up at the sky.''

Jonathan Mishaan, who was married this spring in Bogot√°, Colombia, didn't mind
the noise and thought the resulting overall shots his photographer got were
worth the slight annoyance, which he said those who attended soon got used to,
in part because so much other activity was going on.

''Drones are distracting,'' Mr. Orgill admitted. ''They make a lot of noise, and
guests see them coming and think the government is spying on them.''

Privacy concerns? In an era when most wedding guests are equipped with cellphone
cameras or iPads, and all too eager to use them? Mr. Schulman said there was no
expectation of privacy anyway for guests. Cameras are now everywhere at a
wedding. ''It doesn't matter what technology is used,'' he said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/03/fashion/weddings/bird-plane-no-its-the-wedding
-photographer.html

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Parker Gyokeres used a drone to capture these aerial scenes of
the June 21 wedding of Randy Florke and Sean Patrick Maloney at the Episcopal
Church of St. Mary-in-the-Highlands in Cold Spring, N.Y. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PARKER
GYOKERES/PROPELLERHEADS AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHY)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


