                             867 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 2, 2013 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

How the Pakistani Taliban Became a Deadly Force

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL and DECLAN WALSH

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Q. AND A.; Pg.

LENGTH: 1144 words


Q. Who are the Pakistani Taliban?

A. The Pakistani Taliban Movement, or Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan, is an umbrella
organization loosely uniting up to 30 groups of Pakistani militants along the
tribal areas bordering Afghanistan. Its headquarters, though, is in North and
South Waziristan, the jihadist hub at the western end of the tribal belt, where
it was formally founded in 2007 by a prominent Pashtun commander, Baitullah
Meshud.

Many Pakistani Taliban commanders had fought in Afghanistan as part of the
movement that swept to power in Kabul. When American forces ousted that movement
in 2001, many of its leaders fled across the border into Pakistan. The
Pakistanis among them played host to their Afghan counterparts -- as well as
hundreds of fighters from Al Qaeda -- providing them with shelter, logistical
support and recruits.

The Afghan Taliban and Qaeda fighters steadily radicalized the tribal regions,
encouraging the Pakistani Taliban to spread their influence

across the mountainous region and beyond into Pakistan's settled areas and main
cities.

The militant groups resisted the Pakistani military's efforts to impose control.
They sometimes cooperated in cease-fire agreements with the Pakistani military
and then reneged months later. After Mr. Mehsud created Tehrik-i-Taliban, he led
the group in attacks against the Pakistani state, striking military and civilian
targets in various cities. The group accused the Pakistani government of siding
with the United States in its war against terror, and vowed revenge for the
killing of Pakistani civilians in the 2006 bombing of a madrasa in North-West
Frontier Province, which was renamed Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa in 2010, and in the Red
Mosque siege in Islamabad in 2007.

The United States designated the Pakistani Taliban a terrorist organization in
September 2010 and placed a $5 million reward for information leading to the
arrest of their leader, Hakimullah Mehsud.

Q. Who is Hakimullah Mehsud, and what does his death mean for the Pakistani
Taliban?

[Video: On Oct. 9, Hakimullah Mehsud appeared in a BBC report, saying he was
ready to enter negotiations with the Pakistani government. More videos Â» Watch
on YouTube.]

A. Mr. Mehsud became the leader of the Pakistani Taliban after an American drone
strike killed Baitullah Mehsud in August 2009. A onetime driver for the Taliban
who had risen to prominence through a series of daring attacks, he played a
major role in the humiliating kidnapping of 250 Pakistani soldiers in 2007. He
later stole American jeeps as they were being transported to Afghanistan and was
filmed driving around in one.

Mr. Mehsud proved a wayward, vicious leader. He appeared at the execution of a
former Pakistani intelligence officer, Sultan Amir, known as Colonel Imam, in
2011. Colonel Imam had long been a trainer and mentor to the Taliban in
Afghanistan and Pakistan, yet Mr. Mehsud ignored efforts to intercede on his
behalf by senior Taliban figures, including Mullah Mohammad Omar, the Afghan
Taliban leader, and Sirajuddin Haqqani, the leader of the powerful Haqqani
network.

Hunted by American drones, Mr. Mehsud adopted a low profile in recent months and
was rarely seen in the news media. But in a BBC interview that was broadcast in
October, he vowed to continue his campaign of violence. He was aware that the
C.I.A. was seeking to kill him, he said, adding: ''Don't be afraid. We all have
to die someday.''

Mr. Mehsud's deputy, Abdullah Behar, was among the four people who were killed
with him, according to a Pakistani official, and it was not clear who might
succeed him. Mr. Behar had just assumed the deputy post from Latif Mehsud, a
militant commander whom American forces in Afghanistan detained last month.

Q. What are the most significant attacks claimed by the Pakistani Taliban?

A. Under Baitullah Mehsud, the Pakistani Taliban and affiliated militant groups
unleashed a series of devastating bomb blasts in Pakistan's cities. They
attacked Pakistani military and intelligence targets, including a suicide
bombing in the canteen of Pakistan's elite special forces commandos, the Special
Services Groups, and a hostage-taking inside the army's General Staff
Headquarters in Rawalpindi. The Pakistani Taliban were also behind fatal bomb
blasts on softer targets like the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad in September 2008
and the Pearl Continental Hotel in Peshawar in 2009.

Baitullah Mehsud is also thought to have been behind the suicide bombing that
killed former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto in December 2007.

Under Hakimullah Mehsud, the group demonstrated a close alliance with Al Qaeda.
He claimed a role in the suicide bombing by a Jordanian double agent that killed
seven C.I.A. officials and a Jordanian intelligence official at Camp Chapman in
eastern Afghanistan in December 2009, mounted in revenge for the killing of
Beitullah Mehsud.

The bomber, Humam Khalil Abu Mulal al-Balawi, had been recruited by Jordanian
intelligence and was being used to try to undermine Al Qaeda's leadership based
in Pakistan's tribal areas. The Taliban disseminated video footage showing Mr.
Mehsud beside the Jordanian before the bomber traveled from North Waziristan to
Afghanistan to carry out the attack.

Mr. Mehsud later trained Faisal Shahzad, a Pakistani-American who tried to set
off a car bomb in Times Square in New York City in 2010.

This year, the Pakistani Taliban shot Malala Yousafzai, a Pakistani schoolgirl
in the Swat Valley, in the head for advocating the education of girls. Ms.
Yousafzai went on to become a worldwide symbol of the group's indiscriminate
violence and subjugation of women and girls, traveling to New York to give a
speech at the United Nations. She and her family have moved to England, in part
because the Pakistani Taliban have vowed to attack her again.

Q. What relationship do the Pakistani Taliban have now to the Afghan Taliban?

A. The group owes allegiance to the Afghan Taliban leader, Mullah Mohammed Omar,
and cooperates closely with the Afghan movement in its insurgency in
Afghanistan, providing men, logistics and rear bases for the Afghan Taliban. It
has trained and dispatched hundreds of suicide bombers from Pakistan's tribal
areas into Afghanistan. The movement shares a close relationship with the
Haqqani network, the most hard-core section of the Afghan Taliban operating out
of North Waziristan, which has been behind repeated suicide attacks in and
around Kabul and eastern Afghanistan. The Pakistani Taliban are generally seen
to follow the lead of the Haqqani network's boss, Sirajuddin Haqqani. The two
also cooperate and provide safe haven for Qaeda operatives, including Al Qaeda's
leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri. Pakistani intelligence, which has longstanding ties
with the Haqqani network, has sought to turn the Pakistani Taliban to fight
Western forces in Afghanistan and desist from attacks against Pakistan.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/02/world/asia/how-the-pakistani-taliban-became-a-
deadly-force.html

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Question

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


