                             875 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 22, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Buy It Now

BYLINE: By JEFF HIMMELMAN

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 4015 words


A blue BMW crossed the cracked parking lot and rolled to a stop outside a
tired-looking Macy's.

The passenger door opened, and out sprang John Donahoe, the chief executive of
eBay, who began striding toward the store. It was earlier this year, and from
the outside the Westfield Valley Fair mall near San Jose had a kind of
ghost-town feel to it. But Donahoe thinks he can change that. As he walked from
store to store -- a nearly empty GNC, a quiet Foot Locker -- he pointed out how
little had changed in physical retail stores over the last 30 or 40 years and
what would have to change in the next few years in order for these stores to
compete with Amazon and Walmart.

As he sat in a patisserie on the mall's ground floor, Donahoe touched on his
usual themes: how technology has driven scale and automation; how the big-box
retailers have crushed Main Street; the way in which our shopping experiences
have become less dependent on human interaction. And these changes in the
commercial landscape, he said, tend to be ''phrased in zero-sum terms: big
retailers versus the little guy. Local versus global. The Chinese imports will
kill you. Online is going to disrupt offline.''

There has been much talk about Amazon driving retailers out of business -- most
recently, and somewhat unbelievably, by proposing to use drones to deliver
purchases. For some time now, physical retailers have lived in fear of the
various ways in which Amazon can undercut them. If you're looking for a product
that you don't need to try on or try out, Amazon's customer analytics and
nationwide network of 40-plus enormous fulfillment centers is awfully tough to
compete with. And even if you do need to try something on, Amazon conveniently
includes a bar-code scanner in its mobile application so you can compare prices
while you're in a store and then have the same item shipped to your home with
just a few clicks. (Retailers call this act of checking out products in a store
and then buying them online from a different vendor ''showrooming.'') Amazon
holds such sway that for many it's the default place to buy things online.

And yet online commerce currently accounts for only about 6 percent of all
commerce in the United States. We still buy more than 90 percent of everything
we purchase offline, often by handing over money or swiping a credit card in
exchange for the goods we want. But the proliferation of smartphones and tablets
has increasingly led to the use of digital technology to help us make those
purchases, and it's in that convergence that eBay sees its opportunity. As
Donahoe puts it: ''We view it actually as and. Not online, not offline: Both.''

Most people think of eBay as an online auction house, the world's biggest garage
sale, which it has been for most of its life. But since Donahoe took over in
2008, he has slowly moved the company beyond auctions, developing technology
partnerships with big retailers like Home Depot, Macy's, Toys ''R'' Us and
Target and expanding eBay's online marketplace to include reliable, returnable
goods at fixed prices. (Auctions currently represent just 30 percent of the
purchases made at eBay.com; the site sells 13,000 cars a week through its mobile
app alone, many at fixed prices.)

Under Donahoe, eBay has made 34 acquisitions over the last five years, most of
them to provide the company and its retail partners with enhanced technology.
EBay can help with the back end of websites, create interactive storefronts in
real-world locations, streamline the electronic-payment process or help monitor
inventory in real time. (Outsourcing some of the digital strategy and
technological operations to eBay frees up companies to focus on what they
presumably do best: Make and market their own products.) In select cities, eBay
has also recently introduced eBay Now, an app that allows you to order goods
from participating local vendors and have them delivered to your door in about
an hour for a $5 fee. The company is betting its future on the idea that its
interactive technology can turn shopping into a kind of entertainment, or at
least make commerce something more than simply working through
price-plus-shipping calculations. If eBay can get enough people into Dick's
Sporting Goods to try out a new set of golf clubs and then get them to buy those
clubs in the store, instead of from Amazon, there's a business model there.

AÃ¢[#x20ac][0/00]key element of eBay's vision of the future is the digital
wallet. On a basic level, having a ''digital wallet'' means paying with your
phone, but it's about a lot more than that; it's as much a concept as a product.
EBay bought PayPal in 2002, after PayPal established itself as a safe way to
transfer money between people who didn't know each other (thus facilitating eBay
purchases). For the last several years, eBay has regarded digital payments
through mobile devices as having the potential to change everything -- to
become, as David Marcus, PayPal's president, puts it, ''Money 3.0.''

EBay's current iteration of Money 3.0 sits on the third floor of a low-rise
building on Sixth Avenue in the Flatiron district of Manhattan, in a series of
spaces that the company calls the Commerce Innovation Showcase. A ''brand
ambassador'' named Josh Beyers led me on a tour through them earlier this year.
As he moved from a model living room to a model toy store to a model cafe, the
PayPal mobile app served as a kind of virtual key that unlocked everything that
you might want to do in places like these. Once Beyers ''checked in'' through
the app at the toy store, for example, he was able to retrieve a purchase that
he made earlier on the eBay website without ever having to remove his phone from
his pocket. At the cafe, Beyers's sandwich -- which he ordered earlier from his
phone, down to the condiments -- was ready for him when he arrived. The app also
saved his preferences, so he could order the same thing again later without
having to repeat the process. His picture popped up on the point-of-sale system
at the cafe, and the ''clerk'' verified who he was and then handed him his
sandwich. At a model stadium, he entered with a digital ticket -- StubHub, the
online-ticket-resale vendor, was acquired by eBay several years ago -- and was
able to have food delivered to his seat and a souvenir jersey sent to his home
that same day, even though the in-stadium store was sold out.

There was a hokey Potemkin village feel to the whole show, but the seamlessness
of the personalization was striking. When you shop online -- when you do
anything online, as we are all supposed to know by now -- you're being tracked.
Sites know who you are, when you're there, how you got there, what pages you
clicked on, how long you stayed on each page and in some instances exactly where
and for how long your cursor hovered as you tried to make up your mind. Online
companies collect all of this information and use it. Offline retailers --
physical stores -- do not have these advantages. They don't know who you are
unless you use your card to buy something, and that's only after the fact. They
can't target you or make you any kind of specific offer, as online retailers
can. The technology on display in eBay's Commerce Innovation Showcase is
designed to try to close that gap.

EBay can't claim to be the only one capable of bringing this vision to life.
Along with others, Walmart is also making the move into digital retailing as
fast as it can in an effort to compete with Amazon -- and in a much more direct
way. Walmart's reputation in Silicon Valley is for a kind of old-school
efficiency: getting pallets of goods (often from China) into a big-box store in
America and then into the hands of its customers, all for very low prices. There
are more than 200 million visits to its stores every week. But until fairly
recently, Walmart's online search engine was having trouble doing something as
simple as identifying what visitors wanted when they searched for ''denim.'' And
so two years ago the company opened @WalmartLabs, in Silicon Valley, where 1,500
people now work. There are an additional 1,000 people around the world dedicated
solely to e-commerce. All of Walmart's stores are now ''geofenced'' -- that is,
they know when individual customers are in the store, thanks to the Walmart app
on their phones that can guide them to what they want. In roughly 220 of
Walmart's 4,000 locations, customers can make their purchases with their
telephones, bypassing registers (and their lines) altogether. ''People know
Walmart as the world's largest retailer, but they're going to know us as one of
the largest and fastest-growing e-commerce companies,'' Neil Ashe, the head of
global e-commerce at Walmart, said. This is corporate messaging, to be sure, but
it also reflects a very real shift in strategy. Ashe has said elsewhere that
turning Walmart into a digital retailer is not just a project but a permanent
part of its future as a business.

''People expect Toys 'R' Us to act like Amazon,'' said Christopher Saridakis,
who heads eBay Enterprise, ''but they don't realize how hard it is.'' He was
preparing to show me around a 543,000-square-foot fulfillment center in a remote
corporate complex in Walton, Ky. What he meant was that Amazon has conditioned
consumers to expect an ease to online shopping -- a few clicks, desired items
always in stock, free two-day shipping and returns -- that physical retailers
have a hard time competing with. EBay Enterprise, which was known as GSI
Commerce when eBay purchased it in 2011, now drives eBay's effort to enable its
larger retail partners to meet the same expectations.

Saridakis referred to the facility in Walton as ''the other side of the
computer'': When we press ''buy'' on the websites of Levi's or AÃÂ©ropostale or
Quicksilver or PBS or Major League Baseball, whose products are all warehoused
in Walton, that purchase often becomes a package bound from Walton for your
door. Five miles of conveyor belts feed into a double-tilt tray sorter that
dumps individually wrapped goods into the appropriate chutes at one end of the
facility and then packed-and-stamped boxes onto ramps that lead directly into
UPS trucks at the other. Almost 200,000 products from nearly 600,000 unique
locations within the facility make their way via human pickers and machine
sorters into the proper packages and off to the people who want them.

EBay Enterprise also helps retailers rethink and reorganize how they use their
physical stores. Increasingly, retailers are starting to regard their stores as
small-scale distribution centers for their products, as nodes in the fulfillment
process as well as showrooms. If you live in Manhattan and you order Beanie
Babies online from Toys ''R'' Us, sometimes it makes more economic sense for an
employee at a local Toys ''R'' Us to pack and ship that order than it does to
have the fulfillment center in Kentucky do it. This takes an enormous amount of
integrated technology to orchestrate, but it's also the only way to compete with
Amazon: using everything from physical stores to mobile applications to delivery
services to make sure that customers can get what they want when they want it.
Walmart is doing some of the same things: building million-square-foot
online-only warehouses and experimenting with using stores as distribution
centers. The company is now shipping goods directly from roughly 35 of its 4,000
stores.

While this process is about efficiently moving goods, the deeper purpose is to
improve and manage the relationship with the customer. Healey Cypher, the head
of retail innovation at eBay, tells a story about a bookseller who was convinced
that online commerce would kill his business: ''I said to him: 'How do you know
when someone's in your store? You don't, unless they bought something, and then
only after the purchase. What if you had a platform for the first time ever that
said, ''This person is in your store, they like these things, they bought these
things on your web store, and here's an offer you should give them based on
their purchases''? You don't have to take it, but you've never had that
opportunity before.'Ã¢[#x20ac][0/00]''

The best current example of the digital wallet's promise, according to many in
Silicon Valley, is Uber, a digital platform that connects riders and drivers.
You enter your credit-card information into the Uber app once, and then every
time you want to use it, the app knows where you are and shows you how many cars
are nearby and how soon one can be available. You order with one touch on a
mobile screen, and a text lets you know a driver is on the way and then another
tells you when he's near. He greets you by name, you tell him where you want to
go and then, when you are dropped off, there is no further exchange -- no tip,
no receipt, no signing anything. The app takes care of all that for you. Uber
didn't change anything about the nature of cars or how they are driven. It just
figured out how to use data and technology to make what was out there work much
more efficiently. (EBay, through its acquisition of the company Shutl, has begun
to exploit a similar inefficiency in the spare capacity of courier companies.)

In this fashion, services can become both frictionless and more personal to you.
Imagine that everything functioned as Uber does. Steve Yankovich, the vice
president of innovation and new ventures at eBay, often asks people to do just
that in order to envision eBay's plans for the future. Imagine that, when you
walk into a store, you could look at your mobile device and see everything
currently available in your size there. Instead of having to stuff the ''buy
nine sandwiches, get the 10th sandwich free'' cards from various merchants into
your wallet, suppose every 10th sandwich showed up free without your having to
do anything at all. Ditto your frequent-flier information and every other
affinity or rewards program.

''It's not about payment,'' Jack Dorsey, a founder of Square, a PayPal
competitor, says. ''It's about identity. And it's about the experience that a
merchant can create, which is what actually builds loyalty. We believe that it's
important that the technology, the mechanics of payments, actually fade away to
the background. They disappear completely.'' After helping found Twitter in
2006, Dorsey became chief executive of Square in 2009. Its initial innovation
was the Square Reader, a small device that plugs into the headphone jack of a
smartphone or tablet and enables anyone, anywhere, to process a credit-card
payment. (PayPal now has a similar reader.) In 2011, Square introduced what
would become known as the Square Wallet, an app that links to a credit card (as
Uber does) and allows consumers to pay either by holding their phones up to a
scanner or, in some cases, simply by having the phones on in their pockets.
Dorsey talks about how cool it is to get your coffee without having to do
anything, but he also emphasizes what it means for the merchants. ''The seller
gets this very interesting tool,'' he says. ''They can recognize me when I walk
in.''

The idea is that, someday not too far off from now, you'll store everything in
your digital wallet that you currently store in your old leather one --
including your driver's license, health-insurance information, all of it. We've
all gone out for the night and not wanted to bring a bulky wallet, so we grab
our phone, our license, a credit card and $20 and head out the door. The digital
wallet, if it develops to its potential, will make the license and the credit
card redundant, and eventually also the $20.

It's hard to predict who will prevail in any sector of the tech world, but
PayPal does have some advantages. This year Square processed more than $20
billion in payments -- mostly through its card readers, not the wallet -- but
PayPal has 137 million active users, and millions of them have downloaded the
PayPal app. PayPal's head start has enabled it to create a greater variety of
payment options than other companies offer. It doesn't just link to a credit
card. It's set up more like a bank: through it, you can make payments with any
of your credit cards or a debit card, have the amount withdrawn directly from
your checking account or even finance the purchase through a line of credit with
PayPal itself. And for up to a week after you've made a purchase, you can choose
how you want to pay for it. Almost anybody can build a digital wallet. The trick
is getting people to entrust that wallet with their financial information and
then to offer them enough benefits that they'll use it.

Of course there's a catch -- or, really, a series of catches. The first is that
there's not much genuine demand for the digital wallet. Even Hill Ferguson,
PayPal's chief product officer, says, ''The digital wallet is the linchpin for
everything we do, but it's interesting, because consumers aren't asking for
them.'' People who don't work at corporations that have a financial interest in
digital wallets are even more direct. Sucharita Mulpuru, a vice president with
Forrester Research who specializes in online commerce and consumer behavior,
says: ''Digital wallets, at this point in time, are solutions looking for
problems. We don't fundamentally have friction in payments in the U.S. People
who want to use cash are using cash for a reason: They prefer to or they don't
want to be traced. As for credit cards, there is not something fundamentally
inconvenient about them. They're fast, they're reliable, our networks are
good.'' She has also been watching a start-up called Coin, which is basically
one card with a magnetic strip that can store any swipable card that you have.
At the point of sale you can pick one by pressing a button on the card. This
requires no change whatsoever in consumer behavior. (PayPal has issued a card,
together with Discover, for much the same reason: some people aren't quite ready
to make the leap to purely digital transactions.) Credit cards really are pretty
easy. And if you're paying with your phone, what do you do if you run out of
batteries or if the network is down? The credit-card network rarely falters, and
it is ubiquitous; as of now, there are very few places that look anything like
the Commerce Innovation Showcase.

Another catch is that the ''personalization'' envisioned by the pioneers of the
digital wallet isn't really all that personal, and in many ways the process
benefits retailers more than it does consumers. Entering a store that happens to
be geofenced and receiving notifications on your phone based on who you are and
where you're standing -- does anybody truly want that? The same can be asked of
mobile coupons meant to pull people into stores. The lack of demand for this
stuff right now suggests that consumers aren't so sure. Having a clerk you don't
know identify you by your picture on a point-of-sale system and then hand you
your macchiato isn't much of a personal interaction. Yes, you might be addressed
by name, but it doesn't mean you're going to get to know the clerk. People at
PayPal and Square rhapsodize about the bygone era of 50 or 100 years ago when
you went to a general store in which the owner knew your name and you had an
account and simply took what you wanted and then settled up at some later date.
But it's a purposefully naÃÂ¯ve reading of an idealized past that most of us
never experienced. ''We use newly coined ideas of authenticity to attempt to
hold on to something we can't quite articulate that might have been lost in the
course of becoming modern,'' Jaron Lanier, a well-known computer scientist and
technology expert, writes in his recent book, ''Who Owns the Future?''

There are also privacy concerns. Consumers have to be willing to share
information about themselves -- their location, their preferences -- in order
for the software to do its job. With the recent revelations that the government
has been watching us more thoroughly than we ever knew, that has become a
tougher sell than it once was. Security and the risk of identity theft pose
challenges, too. The hope, according to David Marcus of PayPal, is that
biometric technologies -- for example, the fingerprint sensor on the iPhone 5s
-- will eventually become ubiquitous and create the sense of security that
people need to make the leap to mobile-only transactions. In general, Silicon
Valley tends to be overly optimistic about how fast new technologies and
behaviors will be adopted. Payment companies talk about making the transition to
digital payments within the next three to five years, but Mulpuru says she
thinks it's going to be at least 10 years before people are ready to accept such
a radically new way of doing things.

In some ways, the future is already here. At City Winery in New York City right
now, you can use your PayPal app to track your bill in real time as you eat and
drink and then pay it (including the gratuity) on your phone without having to
wait for the server. (Ferguson, who's in charge of PayPal's digital wallet, says
that the early results indicate that diners leave bigger tips when they don't
have to wait for the check.) And maybe it is better if our phones can work
quietly from our pockets instead of drawing our attention away from others. ''I
think technology is at its best when it reminds us that we already have
everything we need,'' Jack Dorsey says. ''I'm excited when technology disappears
more and we're using what we already have. This whole trend of moving from a
keyboard and a mouse to actually using our fingers, our voice.'' We carry our
phones with us everywhere today, but that doesn't mean we will in a few years.
The strategy of the future isn't necessarily about your phone. It's about your
phone as another intelligent screen.

EBay and Square and retailers trying to compete with Amazon have to try to take
advantage of every new technology because that seems to be the best way to avoid
being squashed. Amazon is so big, has so many distribution centers and offers so
much ease of use that in some sense it has already won -- unless its competitors
can find new ways to bring the convenience and connectivity of online
interaction to the physical retail world.

But even John Donahoe hesitates to predict exactly what facets of the digital
wallet, or of the technologies that eBay is trying to deliver to its retail
partners, will take off. Maybe a ''smart'' mirror in a store, which takes your
measurements and allows you to try on several outfits virtually and then
purchase them from the screen itself, will catch on; maybe it won't. (EBay has
been experimenting with a concept it calls Connected Glass, and the company says
it's much less gimmicky than it sounds. Right now eBay uses it mostly to create
interactive digital storefronts in physical locations like a mall or an unused
building, but Yankovich says that someday we'll pull up to a drive-through and
order by touching the connected screen embedded in our driver-side windows.)
Maybe eBay will find itself fabricating things via 3-D printing, instead of
simply facilitating sales. Maybe you'll be able to use your camera to take a
panoramic scan of your surroundings and then tap on any item in the image and
look up all kinds of things about it, from its cost to its user manual.

In five years, digital wallets may well be a part of how we live, but they might
also remain the province of the same early adopters who bought Segways. The
recent rise of Bitcoin proves how fast things can change. Nobody's going to use
a PayPal digital wallet just because John Donahoe wants them to. Many people at
eBay said the exact same thing, as if singing from the same sheet: ''The
consumer leads; the technology enables.'' A good tagline, but it's also true. If
you don't like it, if it doesn't give you something you don't want to live
without, you won't use it.

''I would say everything we're doing is just enabling the future,'' Donahoe
said, as we wrapped up our interview at the Westfield mall. The slow trickle of
midday mall traffic eased past us. He sounded confident, even if the future was
a little hard to see from where we were sitting.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/22/magazine/ebays-strategy-for-taking-on-amazon.h
tml

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY GRANT CORNETT
 PROP STYLIST: JANINE IVERSEN) CHARTS: MARKET MAKERS   (CHARTS BY U.S.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION) (MM41)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


