                             890 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 27, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Elite U.S. Troops Helping Africans Combat Terror

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1523 words


WASHINGTON -- United States Special Operations troops are forming elite
counterterrorism units in four countries in North and West Africa that American
officials say are pivotal in the widening war against Al Qaeda's affiliates and
associates on the continent, even as they acknowledge the difficulties of
working with weak allies.

The secretive program, financed in part with millions of dollars in classified
Pentagon spending and carried out by trainers, including members of the Army's
Green Berets and Delta Force, was begun last year to instruct and equip hundreds
of handpicked commandos in Libya, Niger, Mauritania and Mali.

The goal over the next few years is to build homegrown African counterterrorism
teams capable of combating fighters like those in Boko Haram, the Islamist
extremist group that abducted nearly 300 Nigerian schoolgirls last month.
American military specialists are helping Nigerian officers in their efforts to
rescue the girls.

''Training indigenous forces to go after threats in their own country is what we
need to be doing,'' said Michael A. Sheehan, who advocated the counterterrorism
program last year when he was the senior Pentagon official in charge of Special
Operations policy. Mr. Sheehan now holds the distinguished chair at the
Combating Terrorism Center at West Point.

As the United States military seeks to extend its counterterrorism reach in
Africa, President Obama is expected to appear at West Point on Wednesday to
emphasize a foreign policy that would avoid large land wars, like those in
Afghanistan and Iraq, and instead stress the training of allied and partner
nations to battle militants on their own soil.

Since the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, the United States has slowly built a
multipronged counterterrorism strategy in Africa: It has carried out armed drone
strikes in Somalia from its only permanent base on the continent, in Djibouti;
backed African proxies and French commandos fighting Islamist extremists in
Somalia and Mali; and increasingly trained African troops to combat insurgents.

Under the new Africa plan, the Pentagon is spending nearly $70 million on
training, intelligence-gathering equipment and other support to build a
counterterrorism battalion in Niger and a similar unit in nearby Mauritania that
are in their ''formative stages,'' a senior Defense Department official said.

In a cautionary note about operating in that part of Africa, troubled by a
chronic shortage of resources and weak regional partners, the effort in Mali has
yet to get off the ground as a new civilian government recovers from a military
coup last year. In Libya, the most ambitious initial training ended
ignominiously last August after a group of armed militia fighters overpowered a
small Libyan guard force at a training base outside Tripoli and stole hundreds
of American-supplied automatic weapons, night-vision goggles, vehicles and other
equipment.

As a result, the training was halted and the American instructors were sent
home. Libyan and American officials have been searching for a more secure
training site in Libya to restart the program. But last summer's debacle and the
political upheaval in Libya since then have caused American officials to rethink
how they select local personnel.

''You have to make sure of who you're training,'' said Maj. Gen. Patrick J.
Donahue II, the commander of United States Army soldiers operating in Africa.
''It can't be the standard, 'Has this guy been a terrorist or some sort of
criminal?' but also, 'What are his allegiances? Is he true to the country, or is
he still bound to his militia?' ''

The American military uses conventional troops and elite Special Operations
forces to train foreign armies all over the world. The tasks range from teaching
basic marksmanship to more advanced counterterrorism tactics and techniques.

In the past decade, the Bush and Obama administrations put a premium on training
and equipping foreign troops to combat terrorists and other Islamist extremists
and persuaded Congress to approve funding for those programs.

The new program to train small counterterrorism forces in Africa resembles
larger efforts by American Special Operations troops carried out in Iraq and
Afghanistan. Pentagon officials declined to comment publicly on the new program,
but budget documents reveal some details.

In Libya, the Pentagon has allotted just over $16 million from a train-and-equip
fund to develop two companies of elite troops and their support elements ''to
counter terrorist and extremist threats in Libya,'' according to budget
documents. For the aborted training outside Tripoli, the Defense Department also
tapped into a classified spending account called Section 1208, devised to aid
foreign troops assisting American forces conducting counterterrorism missions.

For Mauritania, about $29 million has been set aside for logistics and
surveillance equipment in support of the specialized unit.

For Niger, where the United States launches unarmed surveillance drones to fly
over Mali in support of French and United Nations troops, the Pentagon is
spending nearly $15 million on the country's new counterterrorism unit. The
funds are part of $39.5 million this year to train and equip the West Africa
nation's army as it struggles to stem a flow of insurgents across Niger's
lightly guarded borders with Mali, Nigeria and Libya.

Maman S. Sidikou, Niger's ambassador to the United States, said he could not
comment on the counterterrorism unit, but he added in an email, ''Training
remains a critical part of our needs to further increase our men's readiness to
face the many challenges of our regional environment.''

Mr. Sheehan, the former Pentagon official, said a 12-member Army Special Forces
team could train about 50 soldiers initially, and expand after that. ''It can be
done,'' said Mr. Sheehan, who conducted similar training in Latin America in the
1980s as a Special Forces commander.

J. Peter Pham, director of the Africa Center of the Atlantic Council, a policy
research group in Washington, said the United States must make tough political
judgments before investing in ambitious counterterrorism training programs. Mr.
Pham cited the lessons of Mali, where American-trained commanders of elite army
units defected to Islamic insurgents that seized the north last year.

''The host country has to have the political will to fight terrorism, not just
the desire to build up an elite force that could be used for regime
protection,'' Mr. Pham said. ''And the military has to be viewed well or at
least neutrally by a country's population.''

American counterterrorism officials also warn that without a commitment to
support the specialized units, training can stall. ''It's very difficult, very
challenging dealing with African forces,'' said Rudy Atallah, the former
director of African counterterrorism policy for the Pentagon. ''You train them
to a certain level, and then they can run short on gear, communications, even
tires for their vehicles.''

American officials say trainees must be carefully screened and monitored for
possible human rights violations or shifting allegiances. ''Any unit we train
could be used to go after political opponents rather than Al Qaeda,'' said
Frederic Wehrey, a senior policy analyst with the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace who has visited Libya frequently.

No episode is a more sobering reminder of these risks than the collapse of the
American counterterrorism training mission last August at Base 27, also called
Camp Younis, a Libyan military installation about 15 miles from Tripoli, the
capital.

The American trainers issued the Libyans M4 automatic rifles, night-vision
goggles, Glock pistols and armored vehicles. The Libyans took custody of the
weapons and equipment and were responsible for safeguarding them in a warehouse
at the camp, American military officials said.

In a predawn raid on Aug. 4, gunmen believed to be from one of the local
militias overpowered the Libyan guards and seized the weapons and equipment in
the storage area, American officials said.

The American trainers were not at the training camp when the raid occurred
because they regularly stayed at a nearby villa that served as a safe house at
night, American officials said.

American military officials briefed on the raid suspect that the theft was an
inside job in which a Libyan officer or soldier tipped off some local Tripoli
militia members about the mat√©riel stored at the base. Much of the stolen
equipment was later recovered, but not before news reports indicated that some
of the pilfered weapons had showed up online for sale on the black market.

The episode abruptly ended a weekslong training course that American and Libyan
officials had hoped would restart broader training efforts that were suspended
after the attack on the American Mission in Benghazi on Sept. 11, 2012.

A former American Special Operations officer said there was a broader lesson for
any future Libya training mission: ''The take-away here is they're going to take
a lot more adult supervision to make sure the checks and balances are in place,
so you don't have outside militia taking over.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/27/world/africa/us-trains-african-commandos-to-fi
ght-terrorism.html

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO:   A United States Army Special Forces captain with leaders in
Amaloul, Niger, one of the nations in an antiterrorism program. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
PETER TINTI) (A8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


