                             894 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lesson for a Prisoner's Father: Men Sometimes Do Come Back

BYLINE: By ELISABETH BUMILLER, MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT and ANDREW W. LEHREN; Helene
Cooper contributed reporting from Singapore.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1296 words


WASHINGTON -- For five years Robert Bergdahl waged a father's war for the return
of his soldier son.

He accused the Obama administration of stalling talks for his release. He made
his own contact with the Taliban to try to find out more. He pressured the State
Department and Pentagon during frequent trips to Washington, where in 2012 he
spoke in anguish to a crowd of 100,000 on Memorial Day.

A father's war came to an end on Saturday with the freeing of Sgt. Bowe
Bergdahl, 28, who had been America's only known prisoner of war. But Sergeant
Bergdahl, a skier, expert marksman and ballet dancer from rural Idaho, will
remain one of the more unusual members of the American military -- and the
central character in a bizarre disappearance in Afghanistan that set off a
frantic search with Predator drones, Apache attack helicopters and military
tracking dogs.

''Men don't come back from this, you know,'' Mr. Bergdahl bleakly warned his son
at Christmas 2008, just before he was deployed.

On Saturday, in a statement from both of the sergeant's parents, Mr. Bergdahl
and his wife, Jani -- written after President Obama telephoned to tell them of
their son's release -- the tone had changed: ''We were so joyful and relieved
when President Obama called us today to give us the news that Bowe is finally
coming home!'' they wrote. ''We cannot wait to wrap our arms around our only
son.''

Bowe Bergdahl grew up as an outdoorsy free spirit in Hailey, Idaho, a town of
some 6,000 people that provided many of the self-described ''worker bees'' for
the expensive resorts of Ketchum and Sun Valley to the north. His father, an
anthropology major who had dropped out of college, drove a delivery truck for
United Parcel Service. His mother home-schooled Bowe and his elder sister, Sky.

The family lived in a small cabin that had 5,000 books but no telephone, a
close-to-nature existence that fed Sergeant Bergdahl's wanderlust. After a
series of odd jobs, including as a crew member on a large sailboat and dancing
the role of the Nutcracker in the Sun Valley Ballet, he turned to the Army to
try to find focus in his life, friends and family say. He was lured by the
promises of Army recruiters that he would be helping people in other parts of
the world, his father said in an interview two years ago, and had come to see
the military as a Peace Corps with guns.

Those dreams were dashed soon after Bowe Bergdahl arrived in Afghanistan, in May
2009, when American forces were stretched thin. As a machine gunner with the
First Battalion, 501st Parachute Infantry Regiment, Fourth Brigade Combat Team,
25th Infantry Division, he was sent to a small combat outpost in Paktika
Province, on the eastern border with Pakistan.

At first his emails home were cheerful, his father said, full of stories about
''how beautiful it was, how wonderful the people were.'' The tone of the emails
quickly darkened, said Robert Bergdahl, who declined in the interview to say
what specifically set off the change. But in an interview with Robert and Jani
Bergdahl in Rolling Stone magazine in June 2012, the parents described morale
and discipline problems in the unit and quoted from what they said was their
son's last email to them, three days before his capture.

''I am sorry for everything here,'' Sergeant Bergdahl said in the email,
according to Rolling Stone. ''These people need help, yet what they get is the
most conceited country in the world telling them that they are nothing and that
they are stupid, that they have no idea how to live.'' He then described what
his parents believed may have been a formative, traumatic event: seeing an
Afghan child run over by a heavy American military vehicle. ''We don't even care
when we hear each other talk about running their children down in the dirt
streets with our armored trucks,'' Sergeant Bergdahl wrote.

Sergeant Bergdahl's superiors first noticed he was missing on the morning of
June 30, 2009, when he failed to show up for the unit's 9 a.m. roll call.
Initial military reports said Sergeant Bergdahl had simply walked off his post,
but in a Taliban video released after his capture, Sergeant Bergdahl said he had
lagged behind on a patrol.

His parents have not said publicly what they believe happened, but Robert
Bergdahl has discounted accounts in classified Afghan war logs, made public by
WikiLeaks, that suggest insurgents grabbed Sergeant Bergdahl while he was in a
latrine.

However he disappeared, a furious hunt, described in cold military detail in the
war logs, was quickly underway.

The military deployed unmanned Predator surveillance drones overhead, searched
nearby villages with dogs, set up checkpoints and raided suspected enemy
outposts.

The war logs also describe how the American military intercepted communications
among members of the Taliban, who discussed their attempts to sabotage the
search by lining the roads with homemade bombs.

''Yes we have a lot of I.E.D. on the road,'' one of the members of the Taliban
said in the intercepted communications, referring to improvised explosive
devices.

Three hours after that communication was intercepted, military intelligence
confirmed that ''a U.S. soldier has been captured.''

The militants were overheard saying that they believed the Americans were using
many resources to try to find the missing soldier. ''I think he is a big shot,
that is why they are looking for him,'' one of them said.

The documents also describe how the military talked to local tribal elders who
said they had been asked by the Taliban to arrange a prisoner swap with the
Americans. The elders told the Americans that the Taliban wanted 15 of their
''brothers in U.S. jail and some money in exchange'' for Sergeant Bergdahl.

The military had numerous indications after Sergeant Bergdahl's capture that he
was still alive, mostly from videos released by the Taliban. (At the time of his
disappearance, Sergeant Bergdahl had the rank of private. The military promoted
him twice during his captivity.)

The first video surfaced in July 2009, another the following December. In that
video, Sergeant Bergdahl criticized the United States and said that unlike
prisoners held in Guant√°namo Bay and in Abu Ghraib in Iraq, he had been fairly
treated and was not tortured.

''One of the biggest illusions that the Army gives us coming over here as a
soldier, as a private in their Army, is that we're coming over here to fight a
terrorist group of men,'' he said in that video. In an April 2010 video,
Sergeant Bergdahl was shown begging to be released, and appeared in additional
videos in December 2010, February 2011 and this past January, when he seemed in
declining health.

His future in the Army remains unclear. But if Sergeant Bergdahl did in fact
walk off his post, there has been no indication from the military that he will
be punished for doing so. Any penalty appeared even more unlikely on Saturday,
when Robert and Jani Bergdahl appeared in the Rose Garden with Mr. Obama, who
embraced them and welcomed their son home.

As he stood at the president's side, Robert Bergdahl said that his son was
having difficulty with English after spending so much time with the Taliban,
then said ''bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim,'' a common Arabic phrase meaning ''in
the name of God, most gracious, most compassionate,'' and then spoke a few words
in Pashto, a language of Afghanistan.

Hours earlier on Saturday, while Sergeant Bergdahl was on an American military
helicopter after his release, he wrote on a paper plate with a pen -- because
the noise was so loud -- ''S.F.?'' for Special Forces, seeking to find out who
was taking him away.

The men on the helicopter yelled back, ''Yes, we've been looking for you a long
time!''

At which point, according to a senior defense official, Sergeant Bergdahl broke
down crying.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/us/bowe-bergdahl-obama-frees-pow-of-taliban-fi
ve-years.html

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Obama greeted Robert and Jani Bergdahl, the parents
of Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, at the White House on Saturday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLYN
KASTER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


