                             900 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 24, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Ukrainian Fighter Jets Shot Down as Conflict Intensifies

BYLINE: By SABRINA TAVERNISE and DAVID M. HERSZENHORN; Sabrina Tavernise
reported from Snizhne, and David M. Herszenhorn from Kiev, Ukraine. Andrew
Higgins contributed reporting from Kharkiv, Ukraine, Nicola Clark from Paris,
and Alan Cowell from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1335 words


SNIZHNE, Ukraine -- Two Ukrainian Su-25 fighter jets were shot down on Wednesday
in eastern Ukraine near the Russian border. The planes were downed in an area of
heavy fighting between government forces and Russian-backed separatists, near
where a Malaysia Airlines jet was blown out of the sky last week, killing 298
people and drawing international dismay.

The Ukrainian government said the two fighter jets had been brought down near
the village of Dmytrivka, east of Donetsk and about five miles from the Russian
border, where government troops have been pushing hard to cut off the flow of
fighters and supplies from Russia to the insurgents.

The government said the pilots of the fighter jets ejected safely. Government
forces and insurgents appeared to be racing on Wednesday to find them.

Andriy Lysenko, a spokesman for the Ukrainian National Security and Defense
Council, said the two jets had been hit by fire from the Russian side of the
border. ''The planes were shot down from Russian territory,'' Mr. Lysenko said
in a statement on Twitter.

The accusation, which could not be independently verified, carries potentially
serious diplomatic consequences, given the accusations by Ukraine and the United
States that Russia supplied insurgents with the SA-11 surface-to-air missile
system that brought down Malaysia Airlines Flight 17.

Andrei Purgin, a senior separatist leader in Donetsk, said rebel forces had shot
down the two fighter planes using portable shoulder-fired missiles. He said that
the planes had been in an active war zone, and that the Ukrainian military had
continued to bomb rebel forces despite promises that military activity in the
area would cease. ''They haven't stopped for one minute,'' he said.

Ukrainian officials have said that two other military aircraft -- an An-26
transport and another Su-25 fighter -- were shot down last week with direct
involvement by Russia. They said that the missile that destroyed the transport
had been fired from Russian territory, and that the fighter was destroyed in a
dogfight with a MiG-29 fighter that crossed into Ukrainian air space to engage
Ukrainian aircraft. Russia denied both accusations, and the insurgents insisted
that they had brought down the transport on their own.

The An-26 had been flying at an altitude of more than 10,000 feet, well beyond
the range of the surface-to-air rockets previously fired by insurgents,
including the munitions that destroyed an Ilyushin-76 military transport as it
landed in Luhansk in mid-June, killing 49. Ukrainian officials said the
destruction of the An-26 showed that the insurgents had obtained and were using
powerful weapons like the SA-11 that is believed to have been used against the
Malaysia Airlines plane.

Heavy ground combat on Wednesday made it difficult for journalists to approach
Dmytrivka, where the two fighter jets were downed.

At a small checkpoint by a cornfield about six miles away, a rebel fighter who
identified himself as a 41-year-old coal miner said he saw the two planes come
down about noon. He said the fighter jets had been flying low, apparently to
drop a payload, when they were hit and the pilots bailed out. The man said rebel
fighters were searching for the pilots in the surrounding fields.

''It is a hunt,'' he said, looking to the east toward the site. ''They're lying
in the corn. It could take all night.'' As he spoke, more fighter jets buzzed
overhead, but they did not drop any bombs.

By contrast, Mr. Lysenko, the Ukrainian military spokesman, said the two
fighters that were brought down Wednesday were flying at an altitude of 5,200
meters, or more than 17,000 feet, putting them beyond the typical range of
shoulder-fired antiaircraft missiles.

The loss of the two jets was a significant blow to the Ukrainian military, which
has a limited amount of air power, much of it inherited from the breakup of the
Soviet Union.

The episode was part of a wider intensification of fighting on Wednesday.
Government troops retook two cities in the Luhansk region and continued to push
aggressively from the north and west, officials said, while rebel forces blew up
a road bridge, a railroad bridge and train tracks in the city of Horlivka.
Ukrainian forces are struggling hard to seal the porous border with Russia, not
just near Dmytrivka, but also farther north at crossings that have been the
scenes of fierce battles.

The Ukrainian government also said it had shot down a Russian-made Orlan-10
surveillance drone near Amvrosiivka, about 30 miles from Dmytrivka. A similar
drone was reported downed by the Ukrainians in late May.

Mr. Lysenko said Russia had placed more troops along the border and that
cross-border gunfire had increased.

The bodies of victims from Flight 17, which were relinquished on Tuesday by the
rebels who control the crash site, began arriving on Wednesday at a military
base in Eindhoven, the Netherlands. Two military transport aircraft, one Dutch
and one Australian, landed there at midafternoon carrying 40 wooden coffins,
which were greeted with a minute's silence by dignitaries and others at the
base, led by King Willem-Alexander, Queen MÃ¡xima and Prime Minister Mark Rutte.
Two-thirds of the people on board the downed jetliner were from the Netherlands.

The identities of the bodies were not yet known. Ukraine and Malaysia have
authorized the Netherlands to identify and repatriate all the recovered remains
from the crash, which could take months.

Before the remains left the country, officials and foreign diplomats at the
Ukrainian air base in Kharkiv mixed tributes to the dead with angry demands that
those responsible for the downing of the plane be brought to justice.

''This is a tragedy of unspeakable proportions,'' an Australian representative,
Angus Houston, said at the gathering, flanked by a Ukrainian military honor
guard dressed in black uniforms. Four coffins were carried by officers from the
Kiev Military Academy, dressed in blue uniforms with yellow braid, the colors of
the Ukrainian flag.

The Ukrainian vice prime minister, Volodymyr Groysman, said, ''Those who are
guilty for this terrorist act will be punished.''

Mr. Groysman left no doubt that Ukraine believed that the guilty parties
included not only the insurgents in eastern Ukraine but also the Russian
government. ''Russian military personnel launched the missile that hit a
civilian Malaysian aircraft,'' he said. ''We are today sending off innocents who
were murdered.''

Foreign officials at the ceremony in Kharkiv also called for justice, but did
not say whom they blamed for the crash.

The Russian government did not immediately comment on the downed fighter planes.
But a spokesman for the Russian Foreign Ministry issued a forceful statement on
Wednesday accusing the Ukrainian government of making false accusations against
Russia, specifically in relation to the downed passenger jet.

''Instead of cooperating with a thorough and unbiased international
investigation into the causes of the accident, the results of which would then
be made public, with maximum transparency, the Kiev authorities daily and hourly
come up with new, absurd and absolutely groundless accusations against Russia,''
said the spokesman, Alexander Lukashevich.

He also accused Ukraine of obstructing the investigation into the crash, and of
killing civilians during its military operations in the east.

''Kiev does not want to heed the voice of reason and agree on a cease-fire,''
Mr. Lukashevich said. ''Strikes using heavy weapons are being delivered on
populated areas, including those in the direct vicinity of the plane crash
site.''

The site was almost completely deserted on Wednesday, according to Michael
Bociurkiw, a spokesman for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. ''There's no one out here,'' he said.

Malaysian experts pored over smaller pieces of wreckage for a second day, and
expressed surprise ''at how much access we have,'' Mr. Bociurkiw added, but as
for other foreign experts, ''it's not like our door is being broken down.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/24/world/europe/Malaysia-Airlines-jet-ukraine.htm
l

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ukrainian soldiers with coffins carrying the remains of victims
of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 in Kharkiv, Ukraine, on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
SERGEY BOBOK/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)  MAP: Ukranian Forces
Continue to Attack Rebel-Held Areas: Fighting intensified on Wednesday, as the
Ukrainian military advanced into rebel-held territory. Rebels were reported to
have shot down two  Ukrainian fighter jets near the village of Dmytrivka.
Ukrainian defense officials said that government troops had retaken several
cities, but have  been unable to stop the flow of weapons and fighters coming
from Russia. (Source: Ukrainian Council of National Security and Defense) (MAP
BY SATELLITE IMAGERY FROM NASA/USGS LANDSAT)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


