                             903 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mission Almost Impossible

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE.

SCOTT SHANE, a national security reporter for The Times and the author of
''Dismantling Utopia,'' is working on a book about Anwar al-Awlaki, drones and
counterterrorism.

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 693 words


AGENT STORMMy Life Inside Al Qaeda and the CIA

By Morten Storm with Paul Cruickshank and Tim ListerIllustrated. 404 pp.
Atlantic Monthly Press. $26.

It was June 2010, and American intelligence agencies were desperate to track
down Anwar al-Awlaki, the American cleric who had joined Al Qaeda and was
believed to be plotting from the wilds of Yemen. But Awlaki had other things on
his mind. From his hide-out, he sent an encrypted email to Morten Storm to thank
him for dispatching to Yemen the Croatian convert to Islam who had become his
third wife. She had turned out to be even ''better than I expected and better
than you described,'' Awlaki wrote, adding a lascivious smiley face.

Like many of the colorful tales in ''Agent Storm,'' this might seem a figment of
Storm's imagination if not for the book's appendix, which includes an image of
Awlaki's email, one of many items of corroboration. In the end, the big
red-haired Dane's story of his checkered career as a chapter leader in a biker
gang, a radical Muslim activist and finally a spy infiltrating Al Qaeda for
three Western intelligence agencies comes across as highly credible, even if
every detail cannot be checked.

Storm came to public attention in 2012, when he approached the Danish newspaper
Jyllands-Posten with what sounded like a preposterous tale of his friendship
with Awlaki and his work for the C.I.A. But reporters thoroughly checked the
evidence he presented, including a video message Awlaki sent to his intended
bride and a snapshot of a briefcase full of $250,000 in C.I.A. cash, his
resulting payment. Storm even had a recording, made surreptitiously on his
iPhone, of a C.I.A. officer trying to persuade him that his work, while
excellent, had not led to the drone strike that killed Awlaki in September 2011.

As remarkable as his work against Awlaki was, the Dane had played a far broader
role in the infiltration of militant groups. His memoir, written with the help
of Paul Cruickshank, a terrorism analyst, and Tim Lister, a journalist, is both
a rollicking read and a rare insider's account of Western spying in the age of
Al Qaeda, where the risk if exposed is not Cold War-style expulsion but gruesome
execution. Storm says his work made possible the killings of multiple militants,
a fact he claims troubled but did not deter him.

After becoming disillusioned with radical Islam in 2007 -- as suddenly as he had
embraced it a decade earlier -- Storm agreed to work for the Danish intelligence
service and soon carried out regular assignments for the British MI6 and
American C.I.A. as well. He penetrated radical circles in Birmingham and London,
the militant group Al Shabab in East Africa and Al Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula in Yemen (A.Q.A.P.). In addition to Awlaki and the head of A.Q.A.P.,
Nasser al-Wuhayshi, Storm had relationships with an astonishing list of
militants, including Omar Bakri Muhammad, a prominent militant cleric then in
Britain, and Ahmed Abdulkadir Warsame, a commander for Al Shabab now in American
custody. Among Storm's first C.I.A. contacts was a woman he knew as ''Amanda,''
whom he later realized was Elizabeth Hanson, killed in the 2009 bombing of a
C.I.A. base in Khost, Â­Afghanistan.

Storm describes how the C.I.A. and other agencies, when they were not busy
feuding among themselves, supplied him with laptops, cellphones and even an
Arabic dictionary rigged with tracking devices to pass on to militants. He
delivered to his handlers the encryption software used by Al Qaeda, known as
Mujahedeen Secrets 2.0; posed as a coke dealer to explain his payments from spy
agencies; and used couriers to stay in touch with Awlaki. In one eyebrow-raising
claim, he reports that he passed $5,000 in C.I.A. cash to Awlaki in 2008,
suggesting that American taxpayers may have unwittingly contributed to Al Qaeda.

In the end, his loyalty to the intelligence agencies proved no more lasting than
his allegiance to Al Qaeda. Nearly as fed up with the spies as with the
jihadists, Storm decided to go public and says he turned down an offer of
$400,000 to keep his mouth shut. The result is a valuable window on both sides
in a lethal underground war.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/14/books/review/agent-storm-my-life-inside-al-qae
da-and-the-cia-by-morten-storm.html

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


