                             960 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (City Room)

                            April 23, 2014 Wednesday

New York Today: Balloon's-Eye View

BYLINE: ANNIE CORREAL

SECTION: NYREGION

LENGTH: 692 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â What you need to know for Wednesday: Looking down from 1,000 feet,
gusty weather, and a police social-media effort goes awry.


 Good Wednesday morning to you.

About that balloon ...

This week, a big white balloon appeared over the city.

First on the Lower East Side, then uptown, where 57th Street meets the East
River.

Residents were told it was photographing potential views, for architects and
real estate developers.

We decided to learn more.

The balloon is called an aerostat, or a tethered balloon.

Its owners call it Lucy, after its seamstress.

It has gone as high as 1,376 feet - the height of what became One World Trade
Center's observation deck.

"We've taken photos from every new skyscraper in the city," said Curt
Westergard, the president of Digital Design and Imaging Service, a company based
in Falls Church, Va.

That is, before they were built.

The balloon is around 12 feet across. It travels in a trailer, which opens on
top, like a jack-in-the box. A mast guides the balloon and a winch slowly
releases it into the air.

(No, you cannot fly in it.)

Why hire a balloon for the job?

It's illegal to fly commercial drones over urban areas, and helicopters can't go
below 1,200 feet.

As for the residents on the silk-stocking Upper East Side, no one seemed to mind
the slightly bagel-shaped balloon, which hovered over them for around an hour.

"They straightened their jackets and patted their hair," Mr. Westergard said.

"They thought they were being filmed."

Here's what else you need to know for Wednesday.

WEATHER

Uncertainly sunny, steadily breezy, with big gusts now and then.

And a high of 57.

Growing cooler at night.

COMMUTE

Subways: B suspended between Prospect Park and Second Avenue. D suspended
between Atlantic Avenue and Second Avenue. Check latest status.

Rails: O.K. Check L.I.R.R., Metro-North or N.J. Transit status.

Roads: No major delays. Check traffic map or radio report on the 1s or the 8s.

Alternate-side parking is  in effect  the rest of the week.

COMING UP TODAY

Public schools reopen after spring break.

It's the last day to register your child for prekindergarten.

The City Council will propose adding 1,000 new police officers, to expand
community policing and street safety.

The police commissioner speaks at a Denim Day rally against sexual violence on
the steps of City Hall. Noon.

Happy birthday month, Shakespeare. Actors intone his lines while visitors write
them on a giant canvas at Bryant Park. 12:30 p.m.

Old people games for young people: Bingo night at the Royal Palm Shuffleboard
Club in Gowanus, Brooklyn. 7 p.m. [Free, $2 per bingo card]

Books about fighting: Elizabeth Warren talks about her new book, "A Fighting
Chance," at Barnes & Noble in Union Square. 7 p.m. [Free] ...

... While the Iraq war veteran Kevin Powers reads from "Letter Composed During a
Lull in the Fighting: Poems" at Barnes & Noble on the Upper West Side. 7 p.m.
[Free]

For more events, see The New York Times Arts & Entertainment guide.

IN THE NEWS

A police initiative asking New Yorkers to post photos of themselves with
officers on Twitter  backfired when users posted photos of police violence. [New
York Times]

Some upstate dairy farms are now run by robotic milkers. [New York Times]

An autistic 2-year-old survived a fall from a third story window. [Daily News]

Stolen paintings of Nelson Mandela and Snoop Dogg were returned to a
Williamsburg gallery. The artist is "super stoked."  [Bedford and Bowery]

A seal that beached in Brooklyn has been nursed back to health and released.
[Newsday via Sheepshead Bites]

A manual elevator operator looks back on thirty-three years of ups and downs.
[Narratively]

Grid resistant: The last two L-shaped streets in Manhattan. [Scouting New York]

Scoreboard:Raptors gobble Nets, 100-95. Rangers ground Flyers, 4-1. Yankees rip
Red Sox, 9-3. Cardinals outpeck Mets, 3-0.

Kenneth Rosen contributed reporting.

New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late
morning.  You can receive it via email.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at
nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Follow the New York Today columnists, Annie Correal and Andy Newman, on Twitter.

You can always find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


