                             962 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                              June 20, 2014 Friday

Beijing From on High, Just Steer Clear of the Halls of Power

BYLINE: AUSTIN RAMZY

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 524 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â Trey Ratcliff, a travel photographer, took glorious videos of Beijing
with a camera attached to a tiny helicopter drone. But he got slapped on the
wrist for getting close to Zhongnanhai, which is more forbidden than the
Forbidden City.


[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

On all-too-rare clear days, Beijing can be a remarkably beautiful city, with
elegant imperial buildings, ramshackle courtyard homes, shimmering skyscrapers
and jagged hills rising in the distance.

On a recent visit, a New Zealand-based American travel photographer, Trey
Ratcliff, captured some of the Chinese capital's most scenic sites from above,
using a DJI quadcopter and a GoPro camera. The video includes footage of the
Ming Tombs, the Central Business District, the Forbidden City and the Drum and
Bell towers. "Air quality is, at best, hit and miss," he said in an email
interview. "But this time, as you can see from my video, it was pretty good! I
love Beijing and the people there. I choose this location because I think it's
very interesting and full of old-world awesomeness."

Mr. Ratcliff noted in a blog post on his StuckInCustoms.com site that he was
able to shoot for several days without a problem until he went to Beihai Park to
take aerial shots of its famous white stupa. Beihai is just north of
Zhongnanhai, the seat of political power in China, where the country's top
leaders live and work. It is more forbidden than the Forbidden City, and Mr.
Ratcliff's helicopter quickly caught the attention of the police in the park.

"I had a feeling that I was in a rather sensitive area that I did not know
about," he wrote. "So I was sure I had indeed done something wrong, but I just
didn't know what. Thank mao I wasn't actually flying the thing and it was
sitting inert on the ground when security descended."

Mr. Ratcliff wrote that he and his assistant, Ady, were taken to a dimly lighted
police detention facility, where an officer examined the equipment in detail:

I basically explained that I was a photographer, and I like getting unique
angles. I simply like taking photos and making Beijing look beautiful. I noticed
they liked to hear this and were a bit surprised. I saw an opening.

I whipped out my Samsung Nexus Android (S4) phone. I pulled open my photo
portfolio and asked Ady to translate. I started sliding through the photos, then
I handed the phone to the alpha male. He started swiping and asking questions.
She translated and I answered. Oh, that is in Japan. That one is in New Zealand,
my home! That one is in Indonesia. This one is in Death Valley where the rocks
move on their own! Very mysterious! By now, the guy was smiling and inviting the
other officers over to see. They were all crowding around, smiling and laughing,
pointing. Now Ady was laughing and having fun and explaining. I was telling
stories about the photos... etc etc. It was a suddenly a fun party in jail!

Okay, so this little photo party went on for about ten more minutes... this was
an exciting day for them! I think they saw that I was an artist and I really had
no interest in taking photos of sensitive things.

The authorities let Mr. Ratcliff and his assistant go shortly thereafter, with a
warning not to use the camera drone within Beijing's Second Ring Road. A few of
Mr. Ratcliff's colleagues confiscated the quadcopter for the remainder of his
trip, just to make sure he didn't get into any more trouble.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


