                             973 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 16, 2014 Wednesday 12:11 PM EST

READ IN: Wednesday, July 16, 2014:

BYLINE: Reid Wilson

LENGTH: 3031 words



HIGHLIGHT:Â DoJ weighs in on Ohio, Wisconsin voter laws, all the Q2 FEC reports
you'll ever need, poll-a-palooza in Iowa, Mich., N.H., Menendez spends big on
legal bills.


              Sign up for Read In and get all the political news you need every
day delivered right to your inbox! It's fast, easy and free!

A1: The stories you need to read before your first conference call.

-- Israel targeted homes of top Hamas political leaders with air strikes and
urged Palestinians to evacuate border areas on Wednesday as fighting intensified
after a cease-fire deal fell through. Hamas fired rockets as far north as Tel
Aviv. Israeli military intelligence thinks up to half of Hamas's rocket stores
have been destroyed in the past 8 days. (Washington Post)

-- The White House today will announce a series of initiatives to protect
supplies of electricity, improve local planning for flooding and coastal erosion
and predict landslides amid rising oceans and stronger storms as the climate
changes. The Department of Agriculture will award $236 million in grants to
improve electricity infrastructure in rural areas in eight states. (New York
Times)

-- House Democrats will unveil a list of election-year proposals today aimed at
motivating women, blue-collar workers and young voters ahead of the tough
midterm elections. The "100 Day Action Plan" is part of Minority Leader Nancy
Pelosi's goal of picking up 25 seats for November, a hefty lift even in good
political conditions. The agenda includes raising the minimum wage, ensuring
equal pay and improving the Violence Against Women Act, among other planks.
(Washington Post)

-- The Justice Department will intervene in court challenges to laws that
restrict voting in Ohio and Wisconsin, Attorney General Eric Holder said
Tuesday. A federal judge has already ruled Wisconsin's 2012 voter identification
law was unconstitutional, though the state is appealing that ruling. The law in
Ohio eliminated a week of early voting, when voters could register and cast a
ballot on the same day; the ACLU is challenging that law. Holder did not
elaborate on how or when DoJ will intervene. (Reuters)

-- Former think tank president Gary Palmer (R) defeated state Rep. Paul DeMarco
(R) by a 64 percent to 36 percent margin in a runoff for the right to replace
retiring Rep. Spencer Bachus (R-Ala.). DeMarco's campaign spent more, but Palmer
had big backing from the Club for Growth and other outside groups. (Birmingham
News) Baptist minister Mark Walker (R) won 60 percent of the vote to beat out
Rockingham County prosecutor Phil Berger Jr. (R) in a runoff for retiring Rep.
Howard Coble's (R-N.C.) seat. (Charlotte Observer) Both runoff winners are
heavily favored in deep red districts in November.

-- Front Pages: WaPo leads with fears of a wider war in Gaza after cease-fire
talks ended. NYT fronts documents showing General Motors kept silent as the
number of fatal crashes rose. WSJ leads with Fed chair Janet Yellen's testimony
before Congress on Tuesday. USA Today looks at safety precautions, or lack
thereof, at government medical labs. And the Houston Chronicle spotlights Texas
Medicaid rolls, up 1.8 percent since last summer.

National Roundup: What's happening outside the Beltway.

-- WH'16: Texas Gov. Rick Perry (R) will sit down with Lanhee Chen, Mitt
Romney's former policy director, for a tutorial on health care policy. Perry has
sat down in recent months with GOP thinkers including Eliot Cohen, Bob Joseph
and Elliott Abrams as he gears up for a possible second bid. Chen has also met
with New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie (R) and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal (R) in
recent months. (Real Clear Politics) Christie is headed to Iowa tomorrow for a
three-city fundraising swing designed to show off his ability to interact with
voters. (New York Times)

-- Florida: Legislative leaders said Tuesday they will not appeal a judge's
ruling that the state's congressional maps are invalid, as long as they can wait
until after the 2014 election to redraw the two offending districts. The state
House Speaker and Senate president asked Judge Terry Lewis to clarify whether
the legislature can wait until after November to redraw districts held by Reps.
Corrine Brown (D) and Dan Webster (R). (Miami Herald)

-- Illinois: A bipartisan Legislative Audit Committee meets today to decide
whether to call witnesses to testify about an anti-violence program started by
Gov. Pat Quinn (D) in 2010 after a state audit found funds were misused. Federal
and Cook County prosecutors are also looking into the fund, which Quinn rivals
have said amounted to a political slush fund to turn out votes in heavily
Democratic Chicago. Prosecutors have asked the commission to hold off on
subpoenas of Quinn administration officials as they investigate. (Associated
Press) Reid's Take: If this touches Quinn himself, it's nail-in-the-coffin time.
His image as a reformer is the one thing he's always been able to hang his hat
on. Without that image, it's lights out.

-- Louisiana: Blasted FOIA laws. Gov. Bobby Jindal's (R) administration wasn't
just quietly supporting Common Core, but actively advocating for a state law
that made implementation easier. Stafford Palmieri, Jindal's top policy advisor,
told the state Department of Education in emails released under FOIA laws that
the governor would stand behind any Common Core supporters who started taking
political heat. (New Orleans Times-Picayune)

-- New Jersey: Sen. Robert Menendez (D) has spent about $700,000 on attorneys
amid ongoing Justice Department and ethics committee investigations, including
$258,000 through a legal defense fund and more than $400,000 from his campaign
fund. The investigations are looking into whether Menendez did political favors
for a Florida eye doctor who is also a major campaign donor. (Newark
Star-Ledger)

Poll-a-Palooza: Thanks, NBC/Marist!

-- Colorado: A new NBC/Marist poll shows Sen. Mark Udall (D) leading Rep. Cory
Gardner (R) by a 48 percent to 41 percent margin, and Gov. John Hickenlooper (D)
besting former Rep. Bob Beauprez (R) by a 49 percent to 43 percent edge.
Hickenlooper still has a 51 percent favorable rating and a 54 percent job
approval number, while Udall's is a more anemic 42 percent favorable, 36 percent
unfavorable. Obama's approval rating: 40 percent. (NBC, pdf)

-- Michigan:              Rep. Gary Peters (D) leads former Secretary of State
Terri Lynn Land (R) 43 percent to 37 percent in the battle for an open Senate
seat. Gov. Rick Snyder (R) maintains a 46 percent to 44 percent lead over former
Rep. Mark Schauer (D) in the governor's race. President Obama's approval rating
is at just 40 percent, compared with a 49 percent approval rating for Snyder.
(NBC, pdf) Another poll conducted by Denno Research showed Snyder leading
Schauer 43 percent to 35 percent, and Peters leading Land 40 percent to 37
percent. (Detroit News)

-- Iowa: Rep. Bruce Braley (D) and state Sen. Joni Ernst (R) are tied at 43
percent apiece, a new NBC News/Marist poll finds. Both candidates have
fav/unfavs in the mid-30s, and both have net-positive ratings. Just 37 percent
of Iowa voters approve of President Obama's job performance. Gov. Terry Branstad
(R) is cruising to re-election; he leads state Sen. Jack Hatch (D) 53 percent to
38 percent. (NBC)

-- Massachusetts: Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D) leads former Sen. Scott Brown (R) by a
50 percent to 42 percent margin in another NBC News/Marist poll. Shaheen's
fav/unfav numbers are positive, while about an equal number have favorable or
unfavorable feelings about Brown. Obama's approval rating stands at just 39
percent in the Granite State, though Gov. Maggie Hassan (D) has a strong 54
percent approval rating. (NBC)

-- Washington: About 70 percent of voters say they favor Initiative 594, which
would require background checks on all firearms sales in the state. A competing
initiative, I-591, which would prevent background check laws stricter than
federal laws, has support from 46 percent of voters. Support for that measure,
backed by gun rights advocates, has fallen from 55 percent back in April.
(Seattle Times)

DC Digest: What's on tap today in DC.

-- President Obama meets with state, local and tribal leaders on climate change,
where he will list actions the administration is taking to help communities
prepare. This afternoon, Obama meets with members of the Congressional Hispanic
Caucus on the crisis at the border. Tonight, Obama hosts House Democrats at the
White House.

-- Vice President Biden addresses Generation Progress's 2014 Make Progress
National Summit at the Marriott today. Biden will join Obama in meetings with
the Hispanic Caucus and House Democrats.

-- The House takes final votes on the Financial Services and General Government
Appropriations measure today, dispatching ten amendments before final passage,
which is expected to come between 2:30 and 4:30 this afternoon.

-- The Senate meets this morning to vote on cloture for Ronnie White, nominated
to fill a U.S. District Court seat in Eastern Missouri. After the confirmation
vote, the Senate will debate the Democratic response to the Hobby Lobby
decision; a cloture vote is expected at 2:10 p.m.

-- Secretary of State John Kerry is back in Washington. He meets with Luxembourg
Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn at the State Department this morning.

TV Time Out: Our exclusive look at who's advertising, and where.

-- North Carolina: The League of Conservation Voters is back with another big
buy, this one a $710,000 assault on U.S. Senate candidate Thom Tillis (R). The
ads will run July 11 through July 24 on broadcast and cable television in four
markets. Crossroads GPS is going up with a $670,000 flight beginning on July 22,
and Senate Majority PAC is in the middle of a $330,000 buy this week.

FEC Updates: Your one-stop look at Senate candidate fundraising in the second
quarter

-- Alaska: Sen. Mark Begich (D) raised $1.3 million and has $2.2 million on
hand. We haven't seen reports from former Attorney General Dan Sullivan (R) yet.
(Alaska Dispatch News)

-- Arkansas: Sen. Mark Pryor (D) brought in $1.5 million and has $4.1 million in
the bank. Rep. Tom Cotton (R) raised $2.28 million in the last quarter, though
he hasn't said how much he had on hand. (The Hill)

-- Colorado: Sen. Mark Udall (D) raised $3.1 million last quarter and kept $5.7
million on hand. Rep. Cory Gardner (R) pulled in $2.7 million and had $3.4
million left on hand. (Associated Press)

-- Georgia: Philanthropist and businesswoman Michelle Nunn (D) raised $3.45
million last quarter, though her campaign didn't say how much it had left over.
Rep. Jack Kingston (R) raised $1.6 million, while businessman David Perdue (R)
pulled in $974,000 in advance of next week's runoff. (Atlanta
Journal-Constitution, Associated Press)

-- Hawaii: Sen. Brian Schatz (D) raised $820,000 in the second quarter, while
Rep. Colleen Hanabusa (D) pulled in $702,000, including a $117,000 loan from her
own checkbook. (Honolulu Star-Advertiser, HawaiiNewsNow)

-- Iowa: Still waiting on campaign finance reports from Rep. Bruce Braley (D)
and state Sen. Joni Ernst (R).

-- Kentucky: Sen. Mitch McConnell (R) pulled in $3.1 million during the second
quarter, his best quarter ever. He had $9.8 million in the bank as of July 1.
But Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes (D) raised $4 million in the
quarter and ended with $6.2 million on hand. (Louisville Courier-Journal,
Associated Press)

-- Louisiana: Sen. Mary Landrieu (D) pulled in $2.1 million from April through
June, ending with $6.2 million in the bank. Rep. Bill Cassidy (R) pulled in $1.6
million; he's got $5.8 million left over. (New Orleans Times-Picayune)

-- Michigan: Former Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land (R) pulled in $3.35
million last quarter, including $1.2 million she gave her own campaign. Rep.
Gary Peters (D) pulled in almost $6.8 million. Neither candidate said how much
they have on hand. (MLive)

-- Minnesota: Sen. Al Franken (D) pulled in $3.3 million last quarter and had $5
million on hand at the beginning of the month. Businessman Mike McFadden (R),
who still has to get through a primary, raised $1.1 million and kept $2 million
on hand. (Washington Post)

-- Montana: Sen. John Walsh (D) pulled in $1.25 million and had $713,000 in the
bank at the start of the quarter, his campaign said. Rep. Steve Daines (R)
pulled in $1.4 million and had $1.7 million in the bank. (Associated Press)

-- New Hampshire: Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D) raised $2.8 million last quarter and
ended June with $5.1 million in the bank. Former Sen. Scott Brown (R) pulled in
more than $2 million, but didn't release cash on hand numbers. (Boston Globe)

-- North Carolina: Sen. Kay Hagan (D) raised $3.6 million over the last three
months and ended with more than $8.7 million on the bank. State House Speaker
Thom Tillis (R) hasn't released fundraising numbers yet, though they won't be as
impressive after he spent a lot to win his primary last quarter. (Washington
Post)

-- Oregon: Sen. Jeff Merkley (D) raised $1.8 million last quarter and has $3.5
million left over. Physician Monica Wehby (R) has yet to report her totals, but
she too had to spend big to win her May 20 primary. (Oregonian)

-- Virginia: Sen. Mark Warner (D) pulled in $2.7 million over the last quarter,
with a whopping $8.9 million in the bank. Former RNC chairman Ed Gillespie (R)
took in $1.9 million, with $3.1 million on hand at the end of the quarter.
(Richmond Times-Dispatch)

-- West Virginia: Rep. Shelley Moore Capito (R) pulled in $1.3 million and has
almost $5 million left in the bank. Secretary of State Natalie Tennant (R)
raised $777,000 in the last quarter and maintains a bank balance of about $1.5
million. (Charleston Daily Mail)

The Buried Lede: The nuggets that deserve the spotlight.

-- House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R) raised and spent more than $6 million
in the 2013-2014 cycle, including $760,000 between May 22 and June 30, according
to FEC reports covering his June 10 primary loss to Randolph Macon College
Professor Dave Brat (R). Cantor had $1.45 million on hand at the end of the
second quarter. (Richmond Times-Dispatch)

B1: Business, politics and the business of politics

-- The foundation overseeing development of President Obama's forthcoming
library has raised more than $850,000, according to new public filings. Much of
the money comes from Michael Sacks, a major donor to Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel
and CEO of Grosvenor Capital Management; Sacks and his wife donated between
$250,001 and $500,000 to the foundation. The foundation said last month it had
receive 13 bids to host the Obama museum, including one from Columbia
University, one from the University of Hawaii and five from sites around
Chicago. (Chicago Tribune)

-- Rupert Murdoch's Twenty-First Century Fox made an $80 billion takeover bid
for Time Warner in recent weeks, though the offer was rebuffed. As part of the
bid, Fox proposed to sell CNN to avoid any antitrust concerns with Fox News. Fox
first approached Time Warner in early June. (New York Times)

-- Stock futures are higher this morning after a pretty flat day on Wall Street
yesterday. Time Warner stock is up 15 percent (!) on the Murdoch takeover bid.
Most international markets traded higher on Wednesday; European markets were up
more than 1 percent. (CNN)

C1: The long reads you'll need to check out before tonight's cocktail party.

-- Former Rep. Robert Roe (D-N.J.), who helped shape transportation bills in the
1980s and 1990s during his 11 full terms in Congress, died Tuesday at his home
in Green Pond, N.J. He was 90. Roe chaired Congressional hearings on the
Challenger disaster in 1986, and eventually served as chairman of the House
Science, Space and Technology Committee. (New York Times)

C4: The comics page, fun things to read when you're bored at work

-- Portraits of lawmakers hung in the Pennsylvania State Capitol will include
more than just when a member served and what committees he or she chaired;
they'll also include the lawmaker's criminal history, if applicable. The deal is
a compromise with members who wanted portraits of criminals removed entirely.
Four former state House speakers will get plaques with new information,
including Bill DeWeese (D), released from prison in 2014 after serving time for
misusing public funds; Herbert Fineman (D), convicted of obstructing justice in
1977; John Perzel (R), also newly released after a corruption conviction; and
former Senate President pro tem Robert Mellow (D), who pleaded guilty to
conspiracy to commit tax fraud in 2012. (Reuters) Insult, meet injury.

-- Rep. Sean Patrick Maloney (D-N.Y.) used a drone to shoot video of his wedding
when he got married in June. What a nice idea, except that commercial use of
drones is prohibited by the FAA. Maloney sits on the House Transportation and
Infrastructure's Aviation Subcommittee. (New York Daily News)

Attn Matt Drudge: Things conservatives will get outraged by today.

-- An FEC official who once worked for Lois Lerner in the agency's general
counsel's office fired off a list of pro-Obama tweets during the 2012 election,
pledging to donate to the campaign on Obama's birthday and questioning "how
anyone but straight white men can vote Republican." The official, April Sands,
has reached agreement with the FEC Inspector General to avoid criminal charges
while admitting to violating the Hatch Act. (Townhall)

Attn HuffPo: What outrages liberals today

-- State Rep. Adam Kwasman (R), running against Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick (D-Ariz.),
protested Tuesday at a site where immigrant children were being sheltered after
moving from the Texas border. He tweeted a photo of what he said was a bus full
of migrant children. Only problem: The bus was full of kids headed from the
Marana School District to the YMCA's Triangle Y Camp. Kwasman later deleted the
tweet. (Arizona Republic)

-- How can Republicans attract women voters? Talk down to them, of course. "Men
do tend to talk about things on a much higher level," Rep. Renee Ellmers
(R-N.C.) said at a recent RSC event. "[W]e need our male colleagues to
understand that if you can bring it down to a woman's level and what everything
that she is balancing in her life -- that's the way to go." (Washington
Examiner)

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


